Well, good morning again. You can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 12. If you're visiting with us today, we've been walking through together as a congregation the Gospel of Matthew. It tells us the story of Jesus, who He is, what He did, and what it all means. And it's a book that gives us a picture of what it means to follow Him, something which Jesus called people then and now to do. The Gospel of Matthew, as it progresses, begins to emphasize that there's a growing conflict between the religious leaders of Jesus' day and Jesus Himself. And things are starting to heat up. We learned that after two confrontations Jesus had with the Pharisees, the religious leaders, that occurred on and centered around the Sabbath day, the Pharisees went out, the Scripture says, and conspired against Him how to destroy Him. Jesus knows their hearts. He perceives their plots. But He would not live His life just trying to pick fights with His opponents. He would live a life generally of quiet compassion, proclaiming the coming of the kingdom of God in His words and in His deeds. At the same time, He was never afraid to issue stern warnings. There's a bigger battle going on here. It would be His message with the powers of darkness, with Satan the strong man, and I am winning that battle. And it's time for you to pick a side. To be against Jesus, He would warn, is a very dangerous place for you to be.

How would the religious leaders answer Jesus' warnings? Well, they answer it with those warnings with a demand that they're going to put on Him. And that's what we're going to look at today in our text, Matthew chapter 12, beginning at verse 38. The men of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here. And the queen of the south will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here. When the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it passes through waterless places seeking rest but finds none. And then it says, I'll return to my house from which I came. And when it comes, it finds the house empty, swept, and put in order. Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there, and the last state of the person is worse than the first. So also will it be with this evil generation.

This is the word of the Lord this morning. There's a group of people that you may or may not have heard of before. They are an important group, allegedly in our world, at our time, and they are people whose—I guess it's their profession, I'm not exactly sure—but they're called fact-checkers. They check facts, and they usually are fact-checking or checking facts related to what a politician may or may not say. They are the authorities that tell us who is telling the truth. They are, of course, the fact-checkers. Now, one could ask, who are these people? And who made them the fact-checkers? Why should we believe them? And why do we assume if we knew the facts about something that we would necessarily behave any differently anyway?

The Pharisees, they saw themselves as essentially the fact-checkers. They were the ones who—there's the crowd out there, and they're seeing Jesus do this or that or the other thing—but what needs to happen is there needs to be some interpretation of what Jesus is doing. There needs to be a checking of the facts. The crowds need help interpreting what they are hearing and seeing. And so they're determined to check the facts with respect to Jesus.

That's what's happening here at the beginning of our text today. Jesus has just called them out for saying that He, instead of healing people in the name of the Holy Spirit, by the Holy Spirit's power, they were saying that He was doing it by the devil's power, and Jesus was calling them out on that, warning them about that. And then they respond to Him like this. They say, "Teacher, we wish to see a sign from You. We want You to show us a sign." Now, Paul would later, when writing to the Corinthian church, he would say this. He would say, "Jews demand signs and Greeks seek wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, which is a stumbling block to the Jews and which is folly, foolishness, to Gentiles." Paul said this is what they do. This is what my people do. They demand signs. Why? Why do the fact-checkers, the self-appointed authorities, want Jesus to do a sign? Well, it's because Jesus had made some claims about Himself. He had made claims like this: "I am the Lord of the Sabbath." He had made a claim that He was greater than the temple where they would go to worship. He said things like that He was the Son of God and that He was filled with the Holy Spirit and that everything He did flowed from that. That the Spirit of God was actively working whatever Christ declared would come to pass. He claimed that He had the authority to forgive anybody's sins that He wanted to. He also claimed that He was the one, the individual on the planet Earth, who was bringing in the kingdom of God.

Jesus had made some claims, and there needed to be some fact-checking. They needed to be tested. The Pharisees thought they were actually obeying the law. Deuteronomy chapter 13, verses 1 through 5, there is this test. This test that's laid out before the people of God that must be done. And here it is. It's all tied into the signs. It says, "If there is a prophet or there is a dreamer of dreams who arises among you and gives you a sign, gives you a wonder, and the sign or wonder that he tells you, it comes to pass, it happens, it's legit. And if he says then, 'Let's go after other gods which you haven't known, let's serve them,' don't listen to the words of that prophet or that dreamer of dreams. The Lord your God is testing you to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul. You shall walk after the Lord your God and fear Him and keep His commandments and obey His voice and you'll serve Him and you should hold fast to Him. But that prophet or that dreamer of dreams, that he shall be put to death because he's taught rebellion against the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt and redeemed you out of the house of the Lord. He's taught the cross of slavery to make you leave the way which the Lord your God commanded you to walk. So purge the evil from your midst." In other words, if it's a test, if a prophet or a dreamer of dreams says this or that's going to happen, or he performs some miraculous thing, a sign, but then he tells people to not walk after the Lord, then that means that it's all a ruse and that he should be put to death. So in order for them to properly do this test and to check the facts about Jesus, you see, you can't declare Him worthy of death before you have the sign that's going to be the test. And so they say, "Well, show us something, show us a sign."

Now, in terms of the types of signs they were looking for, well, when it comes to signs and wonders, like, Moses is the man. Moses is the guy, that's who they were thinking about. Signs and wonders in Egypt and the wilderness, you know, bread coming down from heaven, massive plagues that sort of decimated a nation. That's the kind of sign they were hoping for. Maybe a little Elijah. "Jesus, show us a sign, bring down some fire from heaven and consume some sacrifice somewhere, and then we'll proceed to part two of your examination where we listen to what you have to say. But first what you have to do is you have to show us a sign so we can test you. You see, if you show us a sign, then we can maybe believe your claims as long as the claims that you're making are consistent with the way that we understand how things operate. But the first thing has to be, in order for us to fact-check, is you've got to give us the fact, show us something.

Now what was lost, of course, was that the Pharisees were setting themselves up to be the judges of Jesus. They thought they were the experts. They thought that they could evaluate the Son of God. They could do the fact-checking. They were self-appointed in that way. But making demands of Jesus to prove who He is or who He said He was, or that the Bible is true, making a demand that the—you know, show me how the Bible is true, those types of things, of course, continue right up until today. Men and women not asking honest questions but rather thinking they're the judges of Jesus and His words and that they are—we are—the fact-checkers, that we as people are in some way above Jesus and His word.

So what does Jesus do? Well, Jesus doesn't submit Himself to those who would put themselves in authority over Him. He says to them something sweet, chicken soupy. He says, "An evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign." Jesus declares that what they're doing is evil and adulterous, anti-God." 

"This judging of Jesus, this self-appointed fact-checking, is not good. And it shows that the leaders are far from the kingdom. Jesus knows that He doesn't have to prove Himself to anyone. But He does say, I will give you one sign. And it's the sign of the prophet Jonah. Just like Jonah was in the belly of the great fish, that story we'll talk about in a second. Just like he was in the belly of the great fish for three days and three nights, I'll be in the heart of the earth for the same amount of time. He's basically saying, here's the one sign I'm going to give you, my death and resurrection. That's the sign.

Paul touches on that in that text that we read earlier when he says Jews demand signs and Greeks seek wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified. We find that the primary evidence given for Jesus being the king, being the Christ in all of Scripture, is the resurrection, is His death and resurrection. That's what Peter preached about in his first sermon, and that's been a part of the Christian proclamation in every creed ever since. That Christ died for our sins and He rose again from the dead to give us life. That's the sign that Jesus is willing to give us to prove who He is, His death and His resurrection.

So what are we all to make of this? Well, there's a principle that sort of emerges from this interaction, and it's this. Because if we think about what's been going on up until this point, you might be sitting and thinking, well, wait a second, they're asking for a sign, but they've seen Him do all kinds of stuff already. And here's the principle. The principle is that seeing is not believing. Seeing is not believing. Just like knowing the truth doesn't necessarily lead to a change of behavior, seeing is not the same thing as believing. We know this because Jesus had, in fact, provided ample proof and evidence that He was the Christ. He had healed the sick, He had raised the dead, He had cast out demons, He had demonstrated His authority over all of creation, He had proclaimed the coming of the kingdom of God, He had not been sinning. This was the way that He was and had shown Himself through the whole time. He had, in fact, provided ample evidence. But what we know is that it would never be enough.

For the Pharisees, what they were saying was that, well, if you just show us a Moses-level sign and wonder, you know, bring out some hail, some frogs, some rivers turning to blood stuff. But even if Jesus did these, the Pharisees would continue to be in the position that they had put themselves in, which would be He would do a sign like that and then they would be the ones who would evaluate Him, which is the heart of the issue. Always has been, always will be. And since it didn't benefit them to find Jesus to be who He says He was, they were determined to undermine Him. And this is one more example of that. They were determined to destroy Him. In the end, anyway, Moses-type signs would never do the trick. Why? Why do we know that? Well, because it didn't do the trick for Moses. The entire generation didn't believe God's promises. They had seen all the things that the Pharisees were asking for. They had seen every bit of it with their own eyes and it didn't bring about faith because seeing is not believing. Believing is believing.

And so once again, Jesus gives them some straight talk. He gives them a very strong warning, which I want to look at now. When I graduated from college knowing absolutely largely nothing about anything and then got immediately into business, I was hired by some folks, great guys who knew my dad and they thought I would work well in this company, which I ended up working in for quite some time. And these two men, they both had their PhDs and this is a real nerd fest so you can check out for just a minute, but it was in applied mathematics and statistics with a focus on trauma research. So they were incredibly knowledgeable and well published in this area. They had written influential papers that are still sort of like a big part of how trauma research and trauma kind of treatments occur today. They were big. So as a college graduate who, you know, I mean, I made it to calculus and I did good in that, but when I began my work there, what I didn't do as a new employee was to ask them if I could see their research and so that I could evaluate it to determine whether they really should be in charge. That would be silly. If they talked math and particularly if they talked trauma and math together, well, they should be listened to. It's what they knew. They were the authorities. Jesus should never have been asked and should never be asked to prove that He is worthy of the authority that is His. He should just be heard. His message should have been believed. He should have been followed. And that's at the heart of the straight talk He gives them.

First, He gives them straight talk about Jonah. He says, look, the men of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah and behold something greater than Jonah is here. Jonah was a prophet. He hated the people that he was preaching to. He just hated. He ran away. He wanted to go and preach to other people or just anyone except these folks who were the mortal enemies of Israel, the Assyrians. And so God though had a different plan, different vision for him, and He sends him to Nineveh. And there's this whole thing with the great fish and the spitting out on the land and all of this, and then eventually he gets to the place where he's doing the proclamation. It was a lovely sermon. It was winsome. It was 40 days and God's going to destroy the entire city. That was the nature of his winsome sermon and of course the people hearing this, what they did was they didn't kill Jonah for saying that. They repented at his preaching. Jonah didn't show a single sign to anybody. He simply said, the Lord says this. And the people believed, and they humbled themselves and they repented. And Jesus reminds the Pharisees and those listening something greater than Jonah is here. The one who is with you is preaching a greater message and the one who is with you is a greater prophet than Jonah ever was.

And then He gives them straight talk about the queen of the south, the queen of Sheba. There's not a whole lot to this story except there was this queen who had heard of the wisdom of Solomon and so she traveled from the ends of the earth to come and just to listen to him talk. Not to see him do any signs, not to see proof that he was wise through some sort of magical incantation. Just to listen to him talk. And Jesus says that she's also going to rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon. Behold, something greater than Solomon is here. She came to listen to a wise king. But Jesus is saying, I am wisdom and I'm the king. Something way greater than Solomon. She didn't need any signs. You see, Nineveh and this queen, they both humbled themselves. They received as true and wise the words of a not-so-great prophet and a deeply flawed king. And Jesus is saying, I am far greater than the not-so-great prophet and the deeply flawed king. I am the prophet, I am the king, and I should be heard. And that's why on the judgment day, on the day of judgment, this generation will be judged because they refuse to listen to me. Instead, they're doing what you're doing. This petty trying to require me to do a sign so that you can stay above me and keep testing me. He calls them out.

And then He changes illustrations. It's an illustration about an unclean spirit. Jesus had just healed this demon-oppressed man and so this is fresh on their minds. It's a picture of Him kind of cleaning the house out for this guy. And then He tells a story of what happens sometimes when an unclean spirit exits a person and when the person doesn't worship God as a result. He says, well, there's this kind of restless wandering. I mean, again, this is not like so we can sort of explore the inner workings of how demon possession exits. Jesus is telling a story to make a point. He says the demon goes out. He's in waterless waste. There's no place for him to go because he's been sort of cast out. And so thinking demonly, he thinks, I guess I'll just try to see if the doors are still open back at my first house. And he goes back and he finds that everything's all neat and tidied up and cleaned out and that there's nothing new there. So he says, well, okay, I'll head back. And this time what I'll do is I'll bring with me seven more demons, a complete sort of takeover. And the state of the man then becomes worse because he thinks he's clean. He thinks he's clean. But in reality, he's not. It's worse for him.

Jesus is basically saying that a person can hear the words of Jesus and be aided by them, can be helped. But if he doesn't respond to them with humility and repentance, but rather sets himself up once again as the judge of God and others, as somebody who is fundamentally clean, that will end up a proud, wicked, self-righteous person with a religious shell. He's talking to the religious leaders. He's saying that's you. You've become a religious shell, a moral shell, a do-good shell. But you haven't fundamentally done the things which are required for a person to be clean, which is to humble yourself and to repent and to believe the gospel. It seems that a person can hear the gospel and even be convicted of sin and so want to be a better person. But if you don't follow Jesus with your whole heart, you end up in a worse state than before because you've not embraced the gospel, but you've tried to become better by just behaving more religiously.

There is a danger here, of course, for all of us to attend to. It's an idea that's sold to you not just in, I mean, just it's sold to you anywhere. It's the idea that you can clean up your life. Sometimes there's a religious way to do that. It can kind of take a religious bent. Our whole culture had that for a while where you just, you do good. You go to church, you do good. You're a do-gooder. And that's the way to be clean. The world's way works out similarly. A lot of effort to, you know, it's a way to clean up your life. It has little to do with Jesus, but a lot to do with moral effort and the world's way works similarly. You can become better if you do the perfect diet or the perfect workout routine or the perfect supplements or the perfect boundaries to keep out all the toxic people and so on and so forth. You can clean up your house. You can make it all okay for yourself. And yet in so doing, you could be getting nowhere. You can actually be in a worse place because you think you've done enough. You look out, you see that you're better than other people and certainly better than what you used to be. But what's missing? Like you remain in charge of it all. You're in charge of it all. You're not humble. You're not repentant.

So hear Jesus' words here. Know that listening to the gospel and cleaning up your life and being a better person is just not the call. There is more required. There is a full commitment, a full commitment to humbling our hearts, to repenting of our sin, to following after Christ. Here's a question for us today. How far, how far would you travel to hear Christ's words? If a queen will travel to the ends of the earth to listen to Solomon, could we attend to God's word regularly, daily? It's right there. We don't have to go to the ends of the earth. If, well, here's the other question. How quick are you to acknowledge your sin? If Nineveh did it immediately, no self-justification, no deflecting, no shifting blame on other people for our problems. Like if they did it immediately, wouldn't Christ want us to repent when we sin?

Christ's call is to humility, not to set ourselves over Him or over His word ever. Christ's call is to repentance, a heart that's not just trying to do good, but a heart that sees that it can't ever be good enough. And so we need the Lord to be working in us. And so we repent when we sin. Christ's call is to ears that will listen, that would go to the ends of the earth to hear the gospel again. It doesn't think, as sometimes I've heard people say, like I've heard all of that before. We ought to be people who want to hear the gospel every single solitary day of our lives because it's life. Christ's call is that you go to the ends of the earth to hear, ears to listen, and then faith without signs, with the exception, of course, of the one sign. Jesus died and He rose again. There were witnesses to all that. Jesus said at another time to His disciple Thomas, who had refused to believe Jesus had risen from the dead until he saw the nail prints in Jesus' hand and the wound in His side. Jesus said to him, have you believed because you've seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.

In the end, you see, there are two choices for everyone always. There are two choices. To believe in Christ, to worship Him, to humble ourselves, to repent, to believe in Christ, or to stand on the outside and be the judge of God and believe that Jesus was a fraud. That's it. Those are the choices. The one leads to life and peace and joy, and the other leads to a terrible realization. It's a terrible realization that the God who you judged as unworthy of your faith is the God who is your judge in the end. And the wages of your sin is death and hell and the empty waste forever. So today there is a commitment in this life, absolutely necessary, one which we saw many make today. Once again, a commitment to follow Jesus. Jesus is so abundantly clear. There is no neutral position. Are you with Him or are you against Him? May it be that the Lord finds us faithful, humble enough to hear His word and respond, able to see our sin, ready to repent of it, and to be blessed as those who have believed without signs except for the one that Jesus died for your sins. And He rose again to give you eternal life by His grace. Praise the Lord. Let's pray.

Father in Heaven, we praise You for sending Your Son to die for our sins and to give us eternal life. May we be ready to hear Your word and to repent when our sins are made known to us. May we commit ourselves to the service of Christ each and every day. And may You fill us with Your Spirit that we might bear good fruit. And all of this we pray in Jesus' name. Amen.

