# LHCP Sunday Morning Sermon - 02 APRIL 2025 "Gethsemane"

Good morning. You can turn with me this morning to Matthew, the Gospel of Matthew, chapter 26. There are two particular prayers of Jesus in the Scriptures that most Christians become familiar with fairly soon after coming to faith. There are, of course, other prayers. But one of those particular prayers we soon get to know and to pray is the Lord's Prayer. And then the second is the one that we're going to consider today, the essence of which we hear in the words, "Not my will, but yours be done." The second prayer was uttered in the garden of Gethsemane. It's likely a cultivated olive grove or orchard situated just outside of Jerusalem. It's just before Jesus' death. Jesus has been in Jerusalem with his disciples, eating the Passover meal. And having finished the meal with the singing of a hymn, the Bible says likely some of the Psalms, Jesus and the disciples head out toward the Mount of Olives and the garden of Gethsemane.

This garden would become known as the place of the most intense praying that we see in the Scriptures. And it's the location where Jesus would be arrested. As we consider God's word today, from Matthew 26, we'll be looking at the garden and the words spoken there. And immediately beforehand. And we'll see the sad condition of the disciples sleeping. And the sad heart of Jesus, his sorrow, and how Jesus' arrest and crucifixion and the scattering of the disciples fulfilled the Scriptures. So hear the word of the Lord this morning from Matthew 26:30-56.

And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. And then Jesus said to them, "You will all fall away because of me this night. For it is written, 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.' But after I am raised up, I will go before you to Galilee." Peter answered him, "Though they all fall away because of you, I will never fall away." And Jesus said to him, "Truly, I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times." Peter said to him, "Even if I must die with you, I will not deny you." And all the disciples said the same.

And then Jesus went with them to a place called Gethsemane. And he said to his disciples, "Sit here while I go over there and pray." And taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful and troubled. And then he said to them, "My soul is very sorrowful, even to death. Remain here and watch with me." And going a little further, he fell on his face and he prayed, saying, "My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as you will." And he came to the disciples and he found them sleeping. And he said to Peter, "So, could you not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray that you may not enter into temptation. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."

Again, for the second time, he went away and prayed, "My Father, if this cannot pass unless I drink it, your will be done." And again he came and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy. So leaving them again, he went away and prayed for the third time, saying the same words again. And then he came to the disciples and said to them, "Sleep and take your rest later on. See, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going. See, my betrayer is at hand."

While he was still speaking, Judas came, one of the twelve. And with him a great crowd with swords and clubs from the chief priests and the elders of the people. Now, the betrayer had given them a sign, saying, "The one I will kiss is the man. Seize him." And he came up to Jesus at once and said, "Greetings, Rabbi." And he kissed him. And Jesus said to him, "Friend, do what you came to do." And then they came up and laid hands on Jesus and seized him. And behold, one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand and drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his ear. And then Jesus said to him, "Put your sword back into its place, for all who take the sword will perish by the sword. Do you think that I cannot appeal to my Father, and he will at once send me more than twelve legions of angels? But how then should the Scriptures be fulfilled that it must be so?"

And at that hour, Jesus said to the crowds, "Have you come out against a robber with swords and clubs to capture me? Day after day I sat in the temple teaching, and you did not seize me. But all this has taken place that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled." And then all the disciples left him and fled. This is the word of the Lord.

This morning, before we talk about the disciples going to sleep in the garden, we ought to consider briefly their good intentions, because we see that they had them. They wanted to be the best disciples that Jesus could imagine. We see this in the conversation on the way to the garden, as they went out to the Mount of Olives where the garden was located. And Jesus made these three predictions. The first one he makes, he says, "You will all fall away because of me this night." They had just had dinner together, they were going out, they had sung, they were heading out to where they would normally have stayed the night. And Jesus says, "Tonight, tonight's the night, every one of you, you're all going to fall away." And he quotes the Scripture. He says, "I will strike." This is from Zechariah. "I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered." And then he makes a second prediction. He says, "But after I'm raised up, I will go before you to Galilee." In other words, this falling away clearly wasn't going to be forever because he was going to see them again. He says, "I'm going to be raised up and I'll see you in Galilee." And then he made a third prediction which was directed towards Peter. And he said, "Truly, I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, within hours, Peter, you will deny me three times." To Peter alone, he speaks of denial that he will in this way be the worst of all, because he won't just run away. He will actively say that he doesn't know Jesus. Instead of denying himself, taking up his cross and following Jesus, Peter would just deny Jesus.

The disciples heard all of this and they had a single response, one response to it all. Ignoring the second prediction concerning Jesus being raised up and meeting them again in Galilee, the disciples, led by Peter, boldly assert that Jesus is incorrect. Jesus doesn't know what he's talking about. That in truth none of them were going to fall away. In all likelihood, the disciples believed Jesus was speaking about the big fight that was about to occur. He was about to take on whoever he needed to take on to establish his kingdom. Some sort of military engagement. And they wanted Jesus to know that they would all remain loyal until the very end. So, beginning with Peter, all of them let Jesus know exactly that they're with him to the end. He doesn't know what he's talking about. He doesn't understand how deep and how rich and how strong is their loyalty to, towards him as their king, as their leader. That was the response of their heart. They reacted to what Jesus said and they said, "We will be loyal." They wanted above everything else to be loyal. They wanted to be loyal. The road to the garden was paved with good intentions.

I think most people want to be better versions of themselves, better versions than what they actually are. There is a sense where all people have at some point or another disbelieved the Scriptures' assessment about themselves, that they are helpless and hopeless sinners. "No, not me." They don't believe. Most don't believe the Scriptures' assessment of themselves any more than the disciples didn't believe Jesus' words about them. Judas aside, all of the disciples were 100% determined in their hearts to die for Jesus if they needed to. It's just that their flesh, their inner strength, it wasn't capable of doing the things they intended to do. And that becomes more evident in the garden.

Jesus, he knows where he's going, he knows what he's going to do, and he needs to pray. And so they've gone up this road and they've had this little side discussion with the loyalty claims and the good intentions, Jesus' predictions. And so he says to the majority, he gives them some instructions. He says, "You sit here and you wait. I need to go and pray, and I'm going to go over there," the Scripture says, "and pray." And Jesus then takes his closest three disciples, Peter and then the two sons of Zebedee, James and John. So Peter, James, and John go with Jesus, and he tells them to remain here. When he stops at another point and says, "Watch with me," Jesus tells them, his best friends, that he is burdened. And he tells them, his best friends, that he's so sorrowful and so sad, he feels like he could die. He must have been at some level comforted by their presence. They were his friends, and he desired further comfort from them. He desired that they would watch and pray for him. Even as he was praying through what he said to them, his friends, was so miserable.

Three times Jesus then came back and found them asleep. Three times he had said that Peter would deny him. Three times before those denials even occurred, Peter had fallen asleep when the Lord had wanted him to watch and pray because he was so sorrowful, so, so horribly sorrowful. He says, "Even unto death." Some of you know sorrow like that. Some of you know others who have experienced sorrow like that or have expressed it like that. Because what we'll see is there's nothing like the sorrow he expressed or knew that we experienced. But we all know what it's like to have someone who is just at the lowest of the low. Jesus told them this, and then they fell asleep.

There's no indication that the other disciples who he had left a little further away were like awake and alert themselves. You know, just the three that failed. Because by the time we get to the point where Jesus is arrested, it's like everybody's startled that there's a crowd there. Well, that's because they were all asleep. And Jesus has some hard words for his friends. He says, "Couldn't you watch just for one hour? I mean, the Spirit is indeed willing. You want. Your intentions are good, but the flesh is so weak." You have these good intentions, but you're not able to live up to those intentions. I suppose after that first rebuke, they tried harder. You could imagine yourself in that situation. "This time I'm going to stay awake." But for the second time, the same thing occurred. They doze off. Jesus comes, finds them in the state. The third time, his hard words continue. He says, "Sleep and take your rest later, because the hour is at hand and so is my betrayer."

Hadn't Jesus been telling parables about this? I mean, if we think back just a little bit, he had been telling parables in reference to his coming again about the importance of always being alert, always being watchful. "Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour." And of course, that call continues for all of us as Christians. "Praying at all times in the Spirit, with all prayer and supplication. To that end, keep alert with all perseverance, making supplication for all the saints." There's this picture that Paul says that we're always to be sort of alert and praying and attentive. People need us to be praying for them. We need people to be praying for us. Jesus needed them to be praying for him. He was going through the worst time, the moments of his life, and his friends went to sleep.

And so Paul says, "Don't you do that. Continue steadfastly in prayer. Be watchful in it with thanksgiving," he says to the Colossians. To the Thessalonians, he says, "Don't let. Let's not sleep as others do. Let's keep awake and be sober." He's not talking about just physical sleep, like you can never get some rest. Some of you, I know, struggle with that. But he's not saying that you can never go to sleep. He's just saying, "Don't be sleepy when it comes to people and prayer and needs. Be alert. Be attentive to what God's doing in people's lives. Care." Jesus poured out compassion every moment of his life. And then the one time that he needed the compassion and care of his life, disciples, they fell asleep. The call to the disciples, our own call, are the same, you know, "Keep watch, pray." By the power of God's Spirit working in us, we can do this. You know, in other words, our good intentions can come to fruition if we're not relying on our own strength here, but the Lord at work in us, he can help us. He can strengthen us by his Spirit to do the things that we need to do. But here, on this most important night, the disciples fell asleep. And that's sad. And sad not just because they failed their friend. It's sad because Christ was so sorry.

At the Supper, Christ's sorrow was evident because he began to speak in ways that were just like, really down. I mean, because he knew in a day it was all coming. And so he spoke at the Supper about the betrayer, the betrayal that was about to happen. And he spoke about his death and what that would mean. And then on the way to the Mount of Olives, he begins to speak about the scattering of his sheep, who he loves, and that he would be, that the shepherd would be stricken. And on the way, the Mount of Olives, the garden, he speaks of the denial of his best friend, friend Peter. And then, in the Garden of Gethsemane, after sharing that his soul was very sorrowful, he three times went and found his closest friends sleeping instead of watching and praying for and with him. And after being arrested, he sees all who once walked with him flee into the darkness.

I think the first sorrow that Jesus experienced was the sorrow of loneliness. Christ's suffering began within his own house. One friend betrays him, one friend denies him. All of them abandon him. Jesus is alone. It seems he suffers real loneliness. Of course, there's the Father. And he goes to Gethsemane to pray to his Father. As long as the Father doesn't forsake him, Jesus knows he is never truly alone.

Not only did he suffer the sorrow of loneliness, he suffered the sorrow of rejection. Because Jesus knew it was coming. He's fully man. He's fully aware of the suffering that was to come. That he would be spat upon. That they would take a crown made of thorns and press it upon his head so that blood would flow. He knew that he would be whipped, and whipped and whipped and whipped. That he would be tortured, that he would be mocked. That he would be stripped of all of his clothing. And then hung up by a road, naked on a cross, to die. And so his soul was troubled. The physical pain up to this point that he might have experienced here and there was nothing compared to what he was about to experience. He also knew that the crowds had largely supported him. But now they would turn against him at the end. But he knew that this was the only way forward. The only way of obedience, of following the path that was set for him. The path he had chosen to walk for the sake of these sleeping disciples and for the sake of sinners ever since. But he knew the sorrow of rejection. He was feeling it. He knew what was coming.

But the greatest sorrow, that was the sorrow of the cup. As he fell on his face and prayed, these words fell from his, "My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as you will." And a second time, "My Father, if this cannot pass unless I drink it, your will be done." And the same words again, a third time. This cup. This cup he had to drink. This was the greatest sorrow of all. Jesus knows that he will suffer rejection and that he will suffer physically on the cross at the hands of the religious and political leaders. Jesus is experiencing loneliness, and he is sorrowful about this. But he also knows, because he's told them this, that he will be raised again. He knows that's coming too. So what is it? I mean, what could cause him to be sorrowful to the point of death, like he's expressing how? What could possibly grieve his soul so much since he knew that the cross was not the end of the story? One thing. The cup. The cup of the wrath of God poured out on sin. The cup of the Father forsaking him. The moment Jesus would become sin for us, the moment of that cry, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me." The absence of God's presence, Hell itself, a mystery so profound and so awful we can't even begin to imagine it.

There is no picture adequate to paint the reality of the cup that Jesus was about to drink. God's wrath for our sins poured out on this man on the cross, already having suffered rejection, suffered torture, nothing is left, no strength. He is a shell of a man. And then the full wrath of God against sin is poured out on him. Who could bear such a thing as this? Only one. The one who is fully God and fully man. The spotless, perfectly righteous Son of God. That man there who's praying in that garden, crying out, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me." But then the beyond comprehension of love of Christ crying out, "But not as I will, as you will. Your will be done."

The Scriptures say it like this all over the place. "One will scarcely die for a righteous person, but perhaps for a good person someone would even dare to do that. But God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us." John, the disciple who slept in the garden, would later say, "He, Jesus, is the propitiation for our sins." He's the wrath-bearer. "And not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world." The writer to the Hebrews would say, "Christ has appeared once for all at the end of the ages to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself." Peter, who also slept in the garden, would soon say, "No. You were ransomed from the futile ways inherited from your forefathers. Not with perishable things such as silver or gold, but with the precious blood of Christ." The precious blood of the man praying there in the garden. The precious blood of Jesus. "Like that of a lamb without blemish or spot. He himself bore our sins on his body." That is the cup. "He bore our sins on his body, on the tree," in the words of the hymn that we just sang, "bearing shame and scoffing rude. In my place condemned he stood. He sealed my pardon with his blood. What a Savior. Guilty, vile, and helpless we, the spotless Lamb of God was he. Full atonement, can it be? Hallelujah. What a Savior."

He took the cup so that we could receive this cup. The sorrowful Christ, submitting out of love for the Father, out of love for poor sinners like us to the will of the Father. And now the time is at hand. The betrayer comes. Judas. And the crowd assembled by the chief priests and the elders of the people arrive in the garden. Judas betrays Jesus with a kiss. The crowd seizes Jesus. And now one of the sleeping disciples leaps into action. We know from the other Gospel accounts that it was Peter. We know that they had a couple of swords with them because they asked Jesus, "Should we bring our swords tonight?" And he said, "You can bring a couple." So we know Peter has his sword. He leaps into action and he slices off the ear of the high priest's servant. He's ready for the big battle. He slept during the battle, and now he's ready for the big battle. We know from the other Gospel accounts that Jesus then heals the ear of the servant. And Jesus then speaks to Peter. We're going to talk about that in a second. But he speaks to Peter directly, the one who used the sword, and tells him to put it away.

I wonder how embarrassed Peter was. Here he thought he was defending Jesus once for all, making up for any mistakes that he had in his life. He was going to do the right thing. He was ready to fight for Jesus to the death. And Jesus heals the ear and tells him to put away his sword. Embarrassed, confused, afraid, not sure what to do. The Scriptures say that at this point all of the disciples left and they fled.

Jesus does say two things before he's taken away. First to Peter, to the disciple with the sword, he says, "Put it away. If you take the sword, you're going to die by it. My kingdom will not be won by military might. This night we are not having an insurrection." And although the disciples were confused in the garden, they would later realize after the resurrection, and we know as God's people, that it's the word of God, the sword of the Spirit, the Gospel, which would be the sword that would win the day, that would lead to the expansion of the kingdom of God throughout the entire world, all the way across oceans to places like this. Besides, Jesus reminds the sword-wielding Peter. He says, "I could ask the Father to send twelve legions of angels." Tens of thousands of angels in a moment could appear. And we know what happens when angels come in the Bible. They could come at my request. So why doesn't he do that? Well, he tells Peter, he says, "But then how could the Scriptures be fulfilled? It must be this way. It's got to be this way."

To the crowds, Jesus also had something to say. He said first, "Like what, am I a robber? Why now? Why here? I was in the temple, you could have arrested me anytime." Of course, he knew why they didn't arrest him then. They were afraid of the popularity he had with the crowds and they were fearful. And he's calling them out on their cowardice. He's speaking simple truth. "You're cowards." And then he says, "But all this has taken place that the Scriptures of the prophets would be fulfilled." Everything must be fulfilled twice. Jesus speaks here of the Scriptures being fulfilled. "It must be. All of it must be."

The Scriptures are pointing to the garden, to the cross, to the resurrection. Everything points here. From Zechariah's prophecy of the shepherd who was struck and the scattering of the sheep, to Isaiah's prophecy of the suffering servant who would bear the sins of his people, to Jeremiah's declaration of a new covenant that would come upon God's people, to Moses' words in Genesis about the crushing of the serpent's head and the wounding of the heel of Eve's descendant, to the promises made to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob of a nation, a people, of an eternal blessing, to the promises of an eternal kingdom that was given to David in his day, to the pictures of the forsaken Son spoken of in Psalm 22. All of it points to Christ, and all of it is pointing to this moment.

What's he going to do at that moment that Judas approaches him with a mob? At the moment that Jesus finishes praying in the garden, there were no shortcuts he could take. Jesus would do his Father's will. He would drink the cup. He would fulfill the Scriptures, and salvation for sinners like you and like me would be made possible.

We'll soon be taking the Lord's Supper together. Remember Gethsemane and Jesus praying there? He took the cup of God's wrath so that we would not suffer that wrath, that we would not die in our sin. May we live then, wide awake in this world. Prayerful, watchful, grateful for the Lord's work in us and in others. May we place our trust fully in him, the One who loved us so much that he would be willing to drink the cup.

Let's pray.
