Well, good morning again, and you can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 9, verses 18 to 34. We're going to be looking at together.

For several weeks now, as we've looked together at the Gospel of Matthew, the story of Jesus, we've seen Jesus calling people to follow Him. But why should they? I mean, that's the question now for us today, too. Why should anyone follow Jesus? And the Gospel's trying to answer that. Up to this point, Jesus has been demonstrating both the desirability and the wisdom of following Him by demonstrating His authority. He has taught with authority. He has shown that He has authority over disease. He's shown that He has authority over the creation and calming the waves, the sea. He's shown that He has authority over the forces of evil and over darkness. He's shown that He has authority over sin as He offers forgiveness to people. He's shown that He is a different category of man, a man that would live and speak in such a way that people would ask the question, what sort of man is this that He can do these things or that He speaks in this way?

And last week, we found Jesus calling Matthew, a tax collector, to follow Him. And then we find Jesus at Matthew's house at a dinner party. Jesus is there, and there are tax collector friends of Matthew there and people classified as sinners. That probably has a variety of types there, but the sinners are there, and the religious leaders are there. There's even a group of men who are disciples of John, the cousin of Jesus, who we know as John the Baptist. John has likely sent his disciples there to both find Jesus and see what he's up to. And these disciples are a bit confused by Jesus's actions and the actions of Jesus's disciples as they don't match what any pious Jew of His day would be doing. So they ask a question that Philip spoke with you all about last week.

I'm not certain, as I've read through this again this week, I'm not certain that Jesus's response to their question about fasting probably settled much for them. Maybe they left a bit more confused than when they got there. They must have returned to John a bit baffled. But this party, this kind of tax collector, sinner party, is a transition of sorts in the Gospel of Matthew into a whole new section. And it's a new question that begins to be asked. And it actually comes from John later on. He's asking this question. He's awaiting his execution, which we'll talk about when we get there. But the question shifts from what sort of man is this that can do these things to is this the one, is this the Christ? Is this the one that the Father has sent into the world to rescue and to redeem people? Is this the one?

The prophet Isaiah, hundreds of years before Jesus even comes onto the scene, he presented to the people of God a picture of the age of the one, of the Christ, of the Messiah. And this is what he says. And he's encouraging the people at that time. He says, "Strengthen the weak hands and make firm the feeble knees. Say to those who have an anxious heart, be strong, fear not. Behold, your God will come with vengeance, with the recompense of God. He will come, and he will save you. And then the eyes of the blind will be opened and the ears of the deaf unstopped. And then shall the lame man leap like a deer, and the tongue of the mute sing for joy."

The actions we will read about today are an answer to the question, is this the one? Hear the word of the Lord, Matthew chapter 9, beginning at verse 18. "While he, while Jesus was saying these things to them, behold, a ruler came in and knelt before him, saying, 'My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her, she'll live.' And Jesus rose and followed him with his disciples. And behold, a woman who had suffered from a discharge of blood for 12 years came up behind him and touched the fringe of his garment. For she said to herself, 'If I only touch his garment, I will be made well.' Jesus turned and seeing her, he said, 'Take heart, daughter, your faith has made you well.' And instantly the woman was made well. And when Jesus came to the ruler's house and saw the flute players and the crowd making a commotion, he said, 'Go away, for the girl is not dead but sleeping.' And they laughed at him. But when the crowd had been put outside, he went in, and he took her by the hand, and the girl arose. And the report of this went through all that district. And as Jesus passed on from there, two blind men followed him, crying aloud, 'Have mercy on us, son of David.' When he entered the house, the blind men came to him, and Jesus said to them, 'Do you believe that I'm able to do this?' And they said to him, 'Yes, Lord.' Then he touched their eyes, saying, 'According to your faith, be it done to you.' And their eyes were opened, and Jesus sternly warned them, 'See that no one knows about it.' But they went away and spread his fame through all that district. And as they were going away, behold, a demon-oppressed man who was mute was brought to him. And when the demon had been cast out, the mute man spoke. And the crowds marveled, saying, 'Never was anything like this seen in Israel.' But the Pharisees said, 'He casts out demons by the prince of demons.'"

This is the word of the Lord this morning. Life in a fallen world is full of tragedy. And all of us, if we've lived long enough, either have personally experienced the loss of a young friend or a child, or we know those who have: a car accident, a disease, suicide. And then we go, and there's the sad, very sad funeral. And then there's the parents who are always overwhelmed by grief. Jesus is at a dinner party. This man, the Bible says, came in while he was saying these things. He had been talking about his being the groom and about it being a time of great celebration, that it was a time of feasting and not fasting. He had been showing and speaking about his love for sinners and tax collectors, his care for the ones who were on the outside. He had been saying and talking to the religious leaders, saying, "You all need to go and reread about mercy. You need to learn some things here. You need to wake up. It's greater than sacrifice." He had been speaking to the religious leaders like that. He had been saying these things. He's at this party, and then this religious leader comes in. He's a ruler, a ruler of the synagogue, the local place of meeting for the Jews. He wasn't a tax collector. He wasn't a prostitute. He wasn't a sinner in the way that that was sort of classified at the time. He was a ruler of respectable men. He was one who had lived well. He had received a position of authority among the people. He would very likely have been known for his generosity and his kindness and compassion towards others. And this man had a 12-year-old daughter, and the daughter had died. So the ruler is desperate, and the ruler is filled with grief. I mean, I suppose there's nothing worse for a parent to experience. Here is this man. He has everything in one way. He likely has as good or as blessed a life that a person can have when they're under a foreign oppression. They're in a place that's sort of tucked away from regular interactions with Roman soldiers all the time, and so he's able to live a life that's a decent, good life. He seems like a good man, but his dear 12-year-old daughter is dead. The funeral procession had been planned. I'm reminded of that earlier description of when Herod in his brutality slaughtered all of these children, and there's this text in the Old Testament that Matthew refers to where he says, "Rachel weeping for her children, she refused to be comforted because they are no more." There's no comfort for this man. Children, the Bible teaches, and experientially we know children are great gifts, precious gifts from the Lord. Jesus would say that the kingdom of God belonged to such as these. We are always glad to see kids running around and playing, and we are thankful when we can watch them grow into adulthood, but that wouldn't be possible here because this man's daughter is dead. "My daughter has just died," he says. And then this ruler who's kneeling before Jesus says this: "But come and lay your hand on her and she will live." This is, of course, a picture of faith that goes beyond what we've seen so far. Here is a man who believes that Jesus can raise a person from the dead if it is his will to do so. That he has that kind of power and authority. Only the greatest prophets, Elijah, Elisha, were known to have done those kinds of things, anything like that ever before. The ruler believes that Jesus must be like them. He's got that kind of authority. He's that close to God. And this faith is not the only thing we see. We also see a picture of the humility that always accompanies true faith. Those two always go together. Here is a ruler, the most respected man likely in the community, and what he comes to do is not demand of Jesus that he comes, not declare, "Clear everybody out of the way, I'm the most important person in the room." He comes, and he throws himself down, and he begs, he pleads with Jesus, "Help me." And then there's Jesus. Jesus is talking about important things. He's talking to John's disciples. He's confronting

 the Pharisees. He's giving hope to tax collectors and sinners around a dinner table. He's there, he's doing these things. And this man comes and he pleads, and remarkably, instead of saying, "I am so sorry," or being direct and saying, "I can't do that, I can't raise people from the dead," Jesus does something which must have amazed everyone eating there, including his own disciples. The Bible says Jesus rose and followed him. It is the only instance in the Bible where Jesus is seen following versus being followed. Jesus followed the man, not because the man was the leader, but he followed him that Christ's glory might be displayed and that the gift of life that only Christ can give would be received by somebody. He followed him for this purpose. Take a moment just to reflect on that in your life. The power, the power of a humble prayer. This man's pleading with Christ in humility. There are those, if you are a Christian in this room, there are those who loved you and knew that outside of Christ, you were dead. Not sick, not needing a little bit of a moral correction. They knew you were dead, dead in your sin, and they pleaded before God for you. And amazingly, as they're pleading to God before you, Christ rose and he followed them to you, to you lying there dead in your sin, without hope except for the mercy of Christ. And he took our hand, and he saved us, and he gave us life. The beautiful part of this is this was a father doing this for his daughter. This is our call always as people, all those that we love, like God's placed people into our lives. Those are the people he's placed into your life. The pleading for those who are dead in their sin, who don't know Christ, ought to be a pleading that we ought to relate to very directly. Are there those who you love who are dead, who are outside of Christ? We must ask. We must plead for their salvation with the kind of humility and faith that we see in this ruler here. "A ruler came in and he knelt before him saying, 'My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her and she will live.' And Jesus rose and followed him with his disciples."

And then there's these two words in the Bible. It says, "And behold," which of course we never use those in our kind of common language anymore, but in the Bible, it's sort of like, wait, something happened here, an interruption. If I were to take a survey and ask you how many of you love to be interrupted, my guess would be that it would be a very low percentage who enjoy interruptions. Few of us like to be interrupted. We're doing something. We're trying to make a point, a very important point. We're trying to accomplish something. We're trying to get from point A to point B, and then something or someone interrupts us and messes it all up. I think one of the most remarkable things about Jesus is how he's just so leisurely about everything. He's interrupted all the time. Wherever he's going, he's consistently interrupted. And he's so leisurely about the whole thing. He never blows up. He never says, "Can't you see I'm doing something important? I've got to have this. This is due tomorrow." He's so leisurely about it all. He seems always aware of the fact that somehow the interruption fits into what he's doing in the world. I don't think that's the main point of this story. I just thought, isn't that interesting? Wouldn't that be interesting for us to sort of contemplate when we're interrupted that maybe it's not that bad that our plans have been interrupted?

So he's walking with this man to his house where the dead daughter is. And behold, the Bible says, there's a sudden interruption. And a woman who had suffered from a discharge of blood for 12 years came up behind him, touched the fringe of his garment, for she said to herself, "If I only touch his garment, I'll be made well." A woman, the Bible says, who had suffered. There we are. And so here we are again, another suffering person approaching Jesus. She suffered physically. The discharge was either painful or uncomfortable, had been going on for 12 years. She would have been, by the nature of the discharge, ritually unclean because of this for that same amount of time. Maybe we could refer to her as a silent leper of sorts. Maybe not very obvious why she had remained outside of the worship in the community, and yet she would remain outside, unclean. And she was a woman of faith. "If I only touch his garment, I don't need to do anything more. I know that if I could only get close enough, that it would go away. I could be healed. I don't need to bother him. I just need to touch him." Jesus, of course, never really allows that to happen. He turns and he sees her. He sees the suffering woman. And he says those words that he had said to the paralytic before, "Take heart, take heart, take a little bit more of your daughter. You're not a person in my eyes that has to come and slip through the back door and just try to touch me. You're my daughter." That's how he sees you. Many of us need to remember that when we're suffering. "Take heart, my daughter." It's personal. It's encouraging. And then he says, "Your faith has made you well," and connects her healing to her trust in the one who brings healing. The woman was made well. She was made clean. And we see soon after Jesus raises the ruler's daughter from the dead, he encounters others who need him. First, there's these two blind men, and then there's a man who is mute. It's like one after another after another. Jesus brings healing to the blind men. He casts out this demon and brings healing to the man who is mute. The sufferers no longer suffering from their maladies. All would go, everyone would go, and they would speak to others throughout the entire country about who Jesus is and what he had done for them. They spread his fame, the Bible says, throughout the district. Common to all of the healings that we read about today was the presence of faith of the one who is being healed. A display of God's power and authority over sickness and this incredible compassion towards those who are suffering. Jesus is willing and able to heal. And we see that healings, or even sometimes as with the paralytic earlier on, explicitly tied to forgiveness of sins, and they're always pointing to a greater salvation and a greater healing that we have in Christ.

So all of this is going on. And before we turn back to the ruler and to his daughter, I would ask, do you really believe that Jesus can heal you of your greatest sufferings? I mean, the things that you suffer from the most, can he bring real comfort to you? Your deepest sorrows? Real sickness? I hope you do. I think the Bible would encourage us towards that. I hope you believe that Jesus is, what I would say is, Jesus is the answer to everything. I hope that you see things that way, the world, that Christ is the answer to it all while remembering that we need not only a savior who can heal our wounds or can help us when we're having great difficulties in life, like that it's not all about here and now, that we need a savior who can raise us from the unavoidable suffering, from death itself, because everyone dies and everyone faces God. Your life is laid out before him and we need a savior.

Let's go back to this story, Jesus and the ruler and a bunch of others there walking through the streets. You can imagine the ruler, Jesus is leisurely towards this interruption, but it may very well be that the ruler was less leisurely in his heart. Maybe he's, let's move on here. We don't know. We're not told. They're walking through the streets, and they're heading towards the ruler's house, and then there it is, there's the house, and outside the house and inside the house, there's all of this commotion. There's just sound and noise and weeping and wailing. There's hired flute players. It's like now you go to a viewing or something, and there'll be like the pictures up, and sometimes there'll be like a video playing and some music. Well, this is that version of that. There's those who are playing music. There's those who are weeping and wailing. They're mourning. That's the appropriate response. The girl is dead. At least we think it's the appropriate response. Jesus saw all that. And then he said this to them. To all the people who were doing what would be absolutely normal under this circumstance, who were mourning. He said, "Go away. For the girl is not dead, but sleeping. Go away." While I am here, death will not be victorious. Death will not be the victor. Go away.

The crowds turn mourning into mockery. They says, the Bible says that they laughed at him. They laughed at the son of God. They laughed at the king. They laughed at the one who had authority over all creation. They laughed at the one who had authority over all the forces of darkness, over disease, over death itself. They laughed at the one who would end up being the judge of their own souls. They laughed at him. Jesus chose not to point any of that out. He just said, "Get them out of here." They put them all outside the house, and he went in. I mean, it's just incredible. If you read in the Old Testament those Elijah stories of them raising people up, there was always this kind of thing that would go on with it, that would have to do some action associated with it. They would pray to God. Not Jesus. He goes in and the most, I mean, can you imagine, the most

 dramatic thing in the world, and this is what the Bible says. He took her by the hand, and the girl arose. That was it. That's the whole story. No incantations. No, I mean, nothing. Jesus walks in. There's a dead girl laying there, but he says, oh, no, she's not really dead. She's just sleeping because I'm here. And he just picks her up. He's a touch of Christ. He just takes her hand, and, of course, that's true of us, is his touch, his hand, stretch out to save. Death is overcome. If he's touched your life, you know that. You know that even if you die, yet you will live. That death itself is just sleeping for the Christian. Here it is. Jesus is the greater resurrection that Jesus himself would accomplish and then would give to all who trust in him.

The crowds turned mourning into mockery, but Jesus knows his Bible because he was behind it, and he turns mourning into dancing. He's God in the flesh. And so just as the psalmist declares, "You've turned my mourning into dancing, you've loosed my sackcloth, you've clothed me with gladness that my glory may sing your praise and not be silent. Oh, Lord, my God, I will give thanks to you forever." The glory of Christ would not be silent on that day. He took the girl by the hand and she arose. Christ's glory is always life, resurrection. One day Jesus himself would rise, and one day all who are in him will rise. Jesus conquered death itself. His authority extends over all things, even the worst of things. For the Christian, the Bible declares with complete 100% confidence and certainty that death has lost its sting. The cross of Christ has secured our salvation. The resurrection of Christ has secured our life. We will not die. We will only sleep just like this girl and then we'll be raised to live with Christ forever.

What a great story. The dead girl raised, the unclean woman made clean and healed, the blind man, the mute man, all of this given to us, not simply as some sort of historical account, but that we might respond to the question that Matthew is now going to bring forward to us. John the Baptist's question, is this the one? The Pharisees were there in the flesh. They were there. They saw much of this. They had heard him at the party, and later they watched him heal the mute guy by casting out the demon. They watched him do that. They didn't think he was the one. They didn't deny. They didn't deny that some great miracle had occurred. They didn't deny that at all. It's just they believed that Jesus had not received his authority from God, but instead that he was playing tricks, that he was serving the devil. They believed that Jesus was a fraud. Now the father and then the daughter, I'm sure, and the blind man and the healed woman and the mute man who can now speak, they couldn't stop telling others about Jesus. In fact, they talked so much, even though Jesus told them not to talk. They talked so much that his fame went into all of the land, like it just spread everywhere. They couldn't stop telling others about Jesus. The blind man went so far as even calling him the son of David, which was a direct proclamation that they saw that he was the one. He was the king. He was the one that's come. What about the crowd? Well, the crowd is just always a crowd, isn't it? The crowd would see like an incredible healing and they'd go, wow, that's awesome. And then turn around the next time we see the crowd and they didn't think too much of Jesus. In fact, they laughed at him. They kept coming and hearing and watching. What about John's disciples? Did they think he was the one? They had been sent to check in with Jesus and had their conversation. Remember, they were having a conversation. That's how this all started. They're having this conversation about fasting. I'm sure they would have followed up, like, we have absolutely no idea what you're talking about. I'm sure they would have followed up, but they had no opportunity to follow up. They could have followed along. They could have gone with Jesus and maybe seen what Jesus did. We can assume, actually, that they probably did, at least some of them did that. That's all the girl raised. Maybe they weren't sure how to interpret all of that. Maybe they report back to John. But here's what we do know. A little later, when John's in prison, he sends some disciples to Jesus to ask, are you the one who is to come or should we look for another? Jesus responded and said this to the disciples of John. He said, "Go and tell John what you hear and see. The blind, they receive their sight. The lame walk and lepers are cleansed. The deaf hear and the dead are raised up. The poor have good news preached to them." Jesus would have them see these healings that we read about today as proof, proof that he's the one, he's the king, he's the Christ. How about you? I mean, do you think he's the one? Is he the king? Is he the Christ? Is he the savior of sinners? Is he the giver of life? Is he the comforter of those who suffer? Is he the one that reaches down and blesses the grieving? Is he the one who hears the prayers, the fervent prayers of the humble man and the humble woman laid out before him for the ones that they love? Is he the one that prays for you before the throne of God and intercedes for you? Is he the one that is willing and able to die for you that you would live? Is he our only hope in a sad, sad world?

Christians, as followers of Jesus, may our souls not be silent. May we sing. May we proclaim always, every day, wherever we can, whenever we can, the wonderful love of God and the wonderful name of Jesus, the one who has saved us, the one who has redeemed your soul, the one who has forgiven your sin, the one who looked at you in your dead state and reached down and touched you and rose you up and gave you life. May his name be magnified in all of the earth. Let's pray. Father in heaven, we are so grateful that you sent your only son into the world, that we might be healed, that we might be comforted in our sorrow, that we might be ministered to in our suffering, and that one day we might be raised from the dead. Lord Jesus, we praise you for the glorious compassion and kindness you have displayed in our lives and the lives of those that we love. Holy Spirit, please bring conviction of sin into the hearts of those who we care about, that they might turn to Jesus for salvation, for forgiveness of sin, and for eternal life. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray these things. Amen. Amen.