Good morning. You can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 8. If you're visiting with us this morning, we've been looking together at the Gospel of Matthew, the story of Jesus, and lately what we've been talking about and considering is what does it mean to actually follow Jesus.

So we saw that there are a lot of good reasons to follow Jesus, including such things as the promise that your sins will be forgiven, the promise of eternal life, these things. And so a lot of people make a decision at some point in their life to follow Him. But making a decision to follow Jesus actually and then actually following Him are two very different things. Jesus speaks of how following Him will mean a total commitment. He must be number one. Following Him won't be easy. There will be a time, as John alluded to, a time of Sabbath rest. But that time is not right now, and there is a time of Sabbath rest. There is a lot of difficulty in life. It's going to be hard. It's going to require a lot of us. Following Jesus isn't just adding a little religion to a decent moral life. It's an acknowledgment that we are not suited to be the leaders, but that we need Christ in Jesus.

And last week, Jesus has been ministering to people, and He is by the Sea of Galilee, and He wants to cross to the other side, where He's been ministering to, to the other side of the sea or the lake there. And so He gets into this boat to cross, and His disciples follow Him into the boat. And as they cross, there is this great storm that is stirred up, and the disciples wake Jesus up, and they're concerned that He doesn't care about them. Why aren't you pulling your weight kind of thing? And He stands up, and He commands the sea to be calm, and it actually is calm. And we see in this story that Jesus is standing up, and not only does Jesus have the authority as a teacher, which He had shown earlier in the Gospel of Matthew, or even as a healer, which He had shown when He healed different people of diseases, but in this story He was showing that He also has authority over all of creation, so much so that He's kind of a different category of man. You can know people who are teachers, and we can know people who can work in healing others, certainly to a lesser extent than Jesus, but in that category, but we know nobody who can stand up and make storms stop. Jesus' authority over creation caused His disciples to ask, "What sort of man is this?" And Matthew, in the story of Matthew, he's talking about the question of the Lord. Matthew wants us to think about that question some more, and so he recounts for us what happens. He's in the boat, and the sea is calm now, and he gets to the other side, and he recounts for us what happens when he gets to the other side.

So this is Matthew chapter 8, verses 28 through 34. Hear the word of the Lord: 

"When they cried to the country of the Gadarenes, two demon-possessed men met him coming out of the tombs, so fierce that no one could pass that way. And behold, they cried out, 'What have you to do with us, O son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?' Now a herd of many pigs was feeding at some distance from them, and the demons begged him, saying, 'If you cast us out, send us away into the herd of pigs.' And he said to them, 'Go.' So they came out, and they went into the pigs, and behold, the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the sea and drowned in the waters. And the herdsmen fled, and going into the city, they told everything, especially what had happened to the demon-possessed men. And behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they begged him to leave their region." 

This is the word of the Lord this morning.

Life is full of comings and goings. We come, we arrive at this or that place to do this or that thing, to visit this or that person, and then we leave. We go back, we go somewhere else, comings and goings. And in this little story, there is a bit of that kind of thing going on, and so I thought we could look at this text from this story from the comings and goings kind of lens this morning.

So the first thing I'd like us to see is that Jesus came. The text said, "When he came to the other side to the country of the Gadarenes." That area of that region was mostly, primarily a Gentile region, thus the pig herding. It was not primarily Jewish, it was Gentile, it was mixed, but primarily that. And what's interesting is that Jesus chose to come there, hinting, as he did earlier when he was healing the centurion's servant, hinting of the inclusion of the Gentiles in his kingdom. It wasn't going to be a restrictive Jewish kingdom. Jesus' kingdom is in all of the world. And so there's even here this hint that as he chooses to go and minister on the Gentile side of the lake that he's doing that. He goes to the other side, it says, "When he came to the other side to the country of the Gadarenes," he comes to the other side. Jesus comes to all sorts of places and all sorts of people. He doesn't restrict himself. In the big picture, the Gospel is to go into all the world. It's to go into every single solitary nation. It's to go to every single type of person. And so it came here to Darlington area. The Gospel came to the other side, the way other side, the other side of the ocean other side. The Gospel made it here. And in a more focused sense, the Gospel within any culture goes to all kinds of people. It goes to the poor and the rich and the male and the female and the old and the young and the married and the single and the divorced and the widowed. It goes to all kinds of people. Jesus comes to the other side. And as Christians, we acknowledge that Jesus is always coming, that he's coming again, we even say, we say that in the creed, that he's coming again to judge the living and the dead. He came and he comes and he's coming again. He's the initiator of everything. He's always coming to people. That's what Jesus does. He comes to people. And that's what he does here. Jesus came to the other side, to the country of the Gadarenes.

Well, the story, if it was just ended there, everybody would be like, "Yep, that Jesus is traveling over there. Maybe some of us are hoping to see a sick person that he sort of touches and heals. And maybe there's some interaction, an intellectual interaction, a theological interaction with some sort of teacher, wise person." But instead, we're confronted with something that largely we're uncomfortable with, and that's two demon-possessed men. Two demon-possessed men. C.S. Lewis once wrote that there are two equal and opposite errors into which our race can fall about the devils. One is to disbelieve in their existence, and the other is to believe and to feel an excessive and unhealthy interest in them. The devils themselves are equally pleased by both errors and hail a materialist or a magician with the same delight. We might say that the worst place to go to learn about or to think about demons is either in a hospital talking to your doctor or in your living room watching a horror movie. Jesus encountered demons. He didn't say, "Oh, those don't exist," and he also didn't have sort of weird Hollywood pictures. He encountered demons. We can picture, we can see what that's like by looking in the Bible. Matthew records a few interactions with people who are possessed by demons. They're these men, these two men. We're not told how they came to be possessed by demons. One would imagine that they at some level had initially maybe invited some of that into their life. But we're not told. Here's what we know about these two men. We know that each day they get up and they live their entirety of their lives in a great, beautiful graveyard in tombs. They're entirely outside of the mainstream of society. We know that these two men are like lepers in their own sort of way. They're like lepers in their own way. Once, maybe, maybe once themselves, they might have been pig herders. Maybe, maybe they had been husbands. Maybe they were fathers. Certainly they were the children of some poor mother who may still be alive thinking about her son living in the tombs. They live on the outskirts of town. It's very possible that people in the town had great pity on them. Maybe it left them at a distance some food. They had a watchful eye on them. We know that because we know that they saw the entire interaction that Jesus had with them. And these men were coming too. It says in the Bible that the two demon-possessed men met him coming out of the tombs so fierce that no one could pass that way. No one could pass by these men. They were fierce. No one tried. They left them there. Jesus' authority had been demonstrated in his teaching, and in his healing, and then over all of creation, and all nature, in calming of the storms. But what about the spiritual forces of evil and darkness in this world? What about demons?

Three times I've seen people who one might describe this way. Whether they were demon-possessed or not, I don't know, but always very wild. In New York City, I saw a woman standing in the middle of a fountain with great strength, y

anking out pipes and yelling and shouting obscenities and throwing pipes at people and the police and people just sort of staring and staying out of the way. In Chicago, a man standing outside a place I was staying, again, just shouting at the top of his lungs, acting wild, roaming the street. Another man telling a friend and I that we were sitting and trying to calm him down and he was saying, "I serve Beelzebub, the prince of demons," and was angrily shouting obscenities and these kinds of things. Men, women, tormented souls. They're human beings. God made them. Does Jesus have power over this? Here are people largely relegated to the edges of society. Our society, like any society, certainly this one here, people are generally safe from them. They stay away and then those souls become forgotten. You see, it's far more sad than scary. They're forgotten souls. They're tormented souls. But somehow they are not forgotten by Jesus. These men and the demons that possess them came to Jesus or maybe came at him or maybe came at his command even. We don't know, but we know that they come. And then the demons speak through these poor men. They declare what the disciples had not yet declared. They declare what sort of man that Jesus is. They say, "Son of God, what have you to do with us, O Son of God?" I'm reminded of the scripture, the apostle James who was talking about faith and works. He said, "Show me your faith apart from works. You have to have both these things together, basically. I'll show you my faith by my works. You believe that God is one. You do well. Even the demons believe and shudder." It's no big deal to believe that Jesus is the Son of God, as James points. It says the demons believe that and we see that here. The demons are aware that Jesus is the Son of God and so has the authority and power to torment them even as they have tormented these poor men. And that is, of course, the demons' fear. The demon-possessed men come to Jesus. And then the third coming is the city itself. One other coming in this story. It says, verse 34, "Behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus." They had heard what had happened from the herdsmen. They had heard what had happened and so they came out. And there they saw it. They likely saw the two wild, tomb-driven men, fierce, in their right minds. And then they saw Jesus. And just like the men in the boat, when Jesus calmed the storm, they were afraid. Who is this powerful Jewish magician, healer, person? What sort of man is this that can cast away demons out of these men? Many people today come to check out Jesus and the Christian faith just like the city. They hear what He has done. They see a changed life. They see a changed life in a family member or maybe in a neighbor or maybe in a friend, co-worker. They're struggling with troubles in their life. And they're like, well, maybe here. They've heard that maybe Jesus has the answers to their troubles. And so they kind of come to check out Jesus. They encounter Him in the preaching of the Gospel and the pages of Scripture. Here is the sort of man who has authority over demons. He has as much authority over the spiritual world as the physical world. This is the sort of man that the Bible would declare is the Son of God. Many people come into the world to see and to hear about that. Jesus comes. The demon-possessed men come out and then the city comes. They're all the comings. But they're also goings in this story.

Usually when I leave in my life, it's by choice. I haven't had to leave somewhere because of danger like fleeing an earthquake or a fire or a war, fleeing because I'm afraid. And I haven't had to leave someplace because I've been kicked out. Now, some of you might from your earlier life remember times where you were kicked out of someplace you shouldn't have been. But I haven't been kicked out of anywhere to my knowledge. I remember having been somewhere I didn't belong and being told by security to go. Some of you may have had these experiences, but to date I haven't. All three of these kinds of goings, though, are in this text. The first is the demons and they're kicked out. The Bible says that there were many pigs. A herd of many pigs was feeding at some distance from them. And Jesus said, "Go." That's the only recorded words in the entire story is "Go." Jesus just speaking, "Go." And the authority in the story tells them they must leave. Those who were so violently possessing these men that would cause them to be so fierce and awful, they're just told with a word that they may leave. It reminds me of Martin Luther and his comment about the one word leading to the demise of the evil one in "A Mighty Fortress is Our God," that song. It says that "Though this world with devils filled would threaten to undo us, we will not fear, for God has willed His truth to triumph through us, the prince of darkness grim. We tremble not for him, his rage we can endure, for lo, his doom is sure. One little word shall fell him. Go." Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Word of God speaks the word "Go" and the demons just go. The pigs go crazy, they drown. We're not told anything else about that. The presumption might be that the demons were in fact some way tormented before their time because that's what they're worried about, tormented before their ultimate destruction and that they don't have any creature now to torment. Now the pigs are dead and the demon-possessed men are in their right mind. Jesus has authority over all the forces of evil in this world. Any evil that is going on in this world right now, this moment, Jesus has authority over that evil. He is the ultimate security guard, bouncer. He is the king. The Jewish leaders would argue that Jesus received that authority from the chief of demons. They said, "Oh, you cast out demons because you yourself have gotten that authority from the chief of demons. That's why you can do it." And the apostles and Matthew, of course, argue that the authority comes from the fact that he's the Son of God and God has authority over everything and can cast out demons. And the herdsmen and the city dwellers have absolutely no idea where the authority came from. They just recognized it and they were afraid because here is a person with authority. Trickery on the part of Jesus and the men wasn't even a possibility. These wild men were known and yet now they're in their right minds, obviously healed, obviously delivered from their torment. The question was simply what sort of men that these demons even obey him. What authority? There are spiritual enemies that we have in this world. Christians who have the Holy Spirit dwelling in them are not able to be a dwelling place for demons, but the Bible is clear that Christians can certainly be under attack, certainly be oppressed. And so Paul speaks of putting on the whole armor of God to resist the schemes of the devil. Is that just talk, chatter? He means that. Put on the whole armor of God to resist the schemes of the devil. As Christians, we entrust ourselves ultimately to the power and authority of Jesus over his and our enemies. This Jesus who can say "Go" to the most terrible and ferocious enemies can say "Go" and as Matthew shows us when Jesus says "Go," they must go. There is no option. He's your king. Darkness cannot rule you because Jesus is king.

The second going is the herdsman. It says that the herdsmen go into the city. The herdsmen fled. They are the ones who flee. They go into the city and they told everything, especially what had happened to the demon-possessed men. There's the herdsmen. They're doing their work. They obviously are working near the tombs but avoiding the tombs because they know the men. They're keeping their eyes open. And they must have observed this group of Jewish men getting out of the boat and heading up the hill. Maybe they wondered to themselves, like I wonder what it's going to be like when they get confronted by the crazy dudes. Maybe they were playing with that in their heads, talking to one another. They see the men come out fiercely resisting and shouting and doing whatever they are to sort of intimidate. And then they see this man step forward and begin talking to them. And then they see the men in their right minds. And then they look around and all of their pigs are acting crazy. And then they all rush into the sea and drown. And they look back and they see the men standing or maybe even bowing before Jesus. What's interesting is that their first action wasn't to come to Jesus, come and see what happened to the men, come and see the man who had done this, maybe even worship themselves. But rather their first action was to go tell other people what they saw because no one was going to believe this and all the pigs are dead. It's like this is Area 51 stuff, UFO. I've got to go and tell the people. We've got to go and say something. They were afraid. Real power, power that is otherworldly, terrifies people. And now they're in a concern. You see those demon-possessed men? They were easy to control, more sad than scary. They were easy to control. You kept them in the tombs and you stayed away from the tombs. That's easy. They could be pitied. They could be fed. You could feel good about yourself, keep them on the outskirts, you know, like we do when we know people who hear voices

 or act violently or harm themselves is just a matter of course. Just keep them at a distance. The herdsmen go to find out what the Gentile leaders have to say about this. What is the city going to have to say about what we just saw? It's like it might be equivalent to having heard the gospel, the great news of the gospel of Jesus and even being moved by it and then to seek to understand it, what you do instead of going to Jesus and going to his word, you go to your computer and do like a Google search or your phone and you search on perspectives on Christianity or Christianity. Is it true? The basic idea is what does the crowd think? What do the opinion polls say? The herdsmen go to the city and send it to Jesus and people do that all the time today. Same thing.

Well, we noted that the city came out to see what was going on and to meet Jesus and at this point we have our final going and that's Jesus himself. It's quite simple actually. It says, "Behold, all the city came out to see Jesus." And at this point we have our final going and it's quite simple actually. It says, "Behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus and when they saw him, they begged him to go away." The city begged Jesus to leave. So he left. He went. The city preferred pigs and demons to Jesus. They preferred their old way of life, the life they knew when these men here were controllable and demon-possessed and out of the way to a life having to deal with Jesus the King and the unknown that came along with that.

The Gospel, friends, is good news. It's good news that Jesus is the King and that he is the Son of God and he has authority over darkness and death and all the spiritual forces of evil. He has authority over creation. He has authority over disease. He speaks authoritative words about everything. The Gospel is good news about how this King, the Son of God, suffered and died on the cross to take away our sins that we might be forgiven and then he rose again to secure for each of us who believe in him eternal life. The Gospel is good news. But the Gospel will never be forced on anyone. Rejecting the Gospel for whatever reason, fear of rejection by others, fear of looking foolish, fear of a changed life, anger towards the church, hurt caused by someone who said that they were a Christian, it is foolish and dangerous to reject the Gospel but you can ask Jesus to go. Understand that if you ask him to go, it's saying essentially I prefer pigs and demons to Jesus and yet people do this all the time. Maybe some of you. Do we simply want our own way? Do we want no disruption? Do we prefer to keep difficult situations and difficult people at arm's length, stay comfortable, as comfortable as possible because comfort and a certain way of life where we are in charge of everything, all of that is at risk if you hear Jesus' call to follow me and you do that. After all, you're following someone with real authority and his enemies will become your enemies very quickly and so there's going to be risk, there's going to be opposition and his life is what we're called to imitate so there's sacrifice and difficulty and even going out and interacting with people that you might not feel super comfortable interacting with. And yet the Gospel is presented to us even today. Follow me, Jesus says. He stands there demonstrating his authority over everything and he says to each one of us in this room, "Follow me." So will you follow him or will you ask him to leave? It's one of the saddest verses in the Bible. The people meeting Jesus, the man who had healed these poor, two tormented, fierce people. "Go away." Praise the Lord that his pursuit of the Gentiles didn't end there with their foolish behavior. He just keeps at it and keeps going. He keeps coming, actually. He's relentless. He wants you to follow him. He wants you to come to him. He doesn't want you to go. He doesn't want you to ask him to leave. He says things like "Come to me, all you are weary and heavy laden and I'll give you rest." He says things like "Come, everyone who thirsts, come to the waters, seek the Lord while you might be found." He says, "Come to the table and eat the bread and drink the wine, my body given for you, my blood shed for you." Jesus says, "Come." May we come to Jesus. Let's pray.

Father in Heaven, we are grateful that you have sent your only Son to live and to die, that we might live and not die. We are grateful that he has authority over all things, all creation, all of our enemies and that he uses that authority for the blessing of his people. We are grateful for the work of your Spirit in us, pointing us to Jesus, enabling us to embrace the Gospel, help us to share that good news with others in our words and our actions. May we live to see many come to Jesus. And it's in the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord, that we pray these things. Amen.