# Sermon: Living Hope Presbyterian Chuch - Well Done, Good and Faithful Servernt

You can turn with me, if you have your Bibles with you this morning, to Matthew, chapter 25. Every week, when we recite the Apostles' Creed, we declare together the basic facts that all true Christians believe. And one of those facts is that Jesus Christ is coming back to judge the living and the dead. This return of the Lord Jesus is what Christians call the Second Coming. That Jesus came the first time, born of Mary, lived and ministered among the people of Israel, was crucified, rose from the dead, and after a short while, Jesus ascended into heaven from where he is now reigning as king. But one day, he's coming again. The Second Coming. Now, this is taught in many places in the Bible, and today's scripture text in the Gospel of Matthew is one of those places.

In our walk through the Gospel of Matthew together as a congregation, we're actually in the middle of a private conversation. Matthew records for us that Jesus is having with his disciples. And last week, we looked carefully at Jesus' words, and we saw a few emphases with respect to the Second Coming. That it will be sudden. No one will know the day or the hour when Christ returns. That it will be visible. There will be no mistaking it. We will all know when Jesus returns. It will be personal. We will all see Jesus when he comes. And it will be a time of division. There will be those who will be welcomed into the kingdom of God and those who will be cast away. Way. Today, we're going to continue to consider this, the Second Coming, as Jesus tells us a parable to illustrate further the nature of this event.

So hear the word of the Lord.

Matthew 25, beginning at verse 14

For it will be like a man going on a journey, who called his servants and entrusted to them his property. To one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to another one, to each according to his ability. And then he went away. He who had received the five talents went at once and traded with them, and he made five talents more. So also, he who had the two talents made two talents more. But he who had received the one talent went and dug in the ground and hid his master's money.

Now, after a long time, the master of those servants came and settled accounts with them. And he who had received the five talents came forward, bringing five talents more, saying, "Master, you delivered to me five talents. Here, I have made five talents more." And his master said to him, "Well done, good and faithful servant. You've been faithful over a little. I will set you over much. Enter into the joy of your master."

And he also who had the two talents came forward, saying, "Master, you delivered to me two talents. Here, I have made two talents more." And his master said to him, "Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a little. I will set you over much. Enter into the joy of your master."

He also, who had received the one talent, came forward, saying, "Master, I knew you to be a hard man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you scattered no seed. So I was afraid, and I went and I hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours." But his master answered him, "You wicked and slothful servant. You knew that I reap where I have not sown and gather where I scatter no seed. Well, then you ought to have invested my money with the bankers. And at my coming, I should have received what was my own with interest. So take the talent from him and give it to him who has the 10 talents. For to everyone who has, will more be given, and he will have an abundance. But from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away. And cast the worthless servant into the outer darkness. In that place, there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth."

This is the word of the Lord.

This morning, when I was finishing, a while ago now, seminary in Florida, we were there for one year, and we stayed at the home of a man who had let us live there with all of our kids, being a bit younger at the time, so he was taking a tremendous risk. And yet, he entrusted it to us. And whenever we left to come back up this way for a break or whatever, there was this routine that Jenny had set up that was a cleaning routine. And if you interviewed my kids, they loved this routine. I mean, who wouldn't? But you basically went room by room, you know, immaculate cleaning all the way out until, like, you got to the front door, and you did one final little sweep and then out. Any broken items would be replaced with newer versions of the exact same items so that it would never be known except that it was nicer that we had been there. It belonged to someone else. It had been entrusted to our care. We were always well aware of the fact that the house was not our own. We don't have the same process when we leave our own house.

In this parable, Jesus tells us that there's this man who owns a great deal of property. He owns a ton, and he's going on a journey. It's his property that's described. He's entrusting to them five talents, two talents, and one talent. Now, the word talent, we, I mean, that word has sort of developed to what we understand when we usually think of talent, like America's Got Talent. But that wouldn't make sense in this context. So what is he talking about? A talent was actually a measure of weight and a measure of money. But all we really need to do, if you have a footnote in your Bible, they'll try to describe for you what a talent is. But basically, for the purpose of this morning, all you need to know is that a talent was a lot of money. He was entrusting them with a ton, with a lot of money. And so the responsibility that they had was enormous. It was an enormous responsibility to be given a talent to look over while this guy was away.

It's clear in the story, actually, that everything in the story belonged to the master, right? I mean, it's his property. They're his servants, bondservants. Any profit that was made was his profit. It seems clear even that there was some expectation, obviously, that there would be a wise handling of this money, a wise investment of the talent that he had given, that he desired an increase while it was under the care of his servants. It is the master, then, that's always making the decisions here in terms of who to call and who to entrust with this or that thing. It was his decision to call and entrust the servants with his money.

And so we ought to pause here. Remember that this is a parable. It's teaching us about life. And so it provides us something to think about, that as people, God has entrusted us with much. That is His. Adam, if you remember, in the very beginning of the Bible, was called, and he was entrusted with the stewardship, the entire creation, everything that God had made. And that continues down to us today. Stewardship of all things. Each of us are not randomly made. We are, the scripture says, fearfully and wonderfully made. Each person is called and entrusted with a life, with work to do, with gifts that are given by God for his glory and the good of other people. Each person is given more than, like, a talent that you might have, but like a talent, a weight, a life. You've been entrusted and called to steward much, everyone in the room.

And he gives, the Bible says here, to each according to his or her ability. In other words, all men are not created equal. We see that here in the parable, and we know that from our life. Some are more gifted and talented than others. Some have been given greater intellect, greater skills, strength, business prowess, social skills, and so on and so forth. I remember, and this is how we've taken that truth and really butchered it, growing up here in Harford County. I don't know if there's others who were in the public school system here in Harford County, but we had this very poorly thought-through program that I was a part of. It was called the Gifted and Talented program. So you took the kids who were a little bit more intellectually, academically inclined, and you put them in this group, and you called them the gifted and talented kids. Now, if you weren't in that group, what are you, right? Like, you're sort of like the moderately insignificant children. I mean, what is this? So, but anyway, what they were trying to recognize, poorly conceived, is that some people were more academically strong than others, right? Everybody's not the exact same.

God gives people different talents and gifts, but all, at some level, are gifted and talented. We have all been given something which is ours to steward, our life and everything that comes along with it. That you, baby. Gifts and talents that God gives aren't restricted to just your natural abilities, but can include callings and gifts given by God's God that, Sophia espera via. But God gives it all. He gives it with his wisdom. He gives us responsibility, and he has expectations in terms of what he would have us do as people to glorify him with everything and to do good for others, right? So this is what is, is true. He gives, no, she's not, according to his ability.

And now in the parable, what happens? Well, he does this. He gives it, and then it says that the master went away. He goes away, and, and I, I thought about that. Like, in other words, he's not going to be there to oversee everything they do. He's, he's not going to tell them what to do next. He's given them the talents, he's given them the responsibility, he's entrusted. And now he's going to go on a journey. He tells Adam to be fruitful and to multiply and to fill the earth and subdue it. And then he leaves it to Adam to sort of figure out exactly how that's all going to work. He doesn't go and give you, down to the very detail, everything that you're supposed, supposed to do next. He provides us with principles, His Word. But he's on a journey, so to speak.

Jesus tells the disciples to go and make disciples of all nations. And even as he promises to be with us, which he is by His Spirit, he ascends into heaven. He goes away. He's coming again, he's gone away, leaving us to figure out exactly how we are to do this great work of evangelism. He doesn't give you a manual for that, exactly what to do in this situation and that situation. And yet he expects that we would be applying ourselves in that way. Jesus instructs us in this powerful statement to love one another, and then he goes away. A wide freedom on how that's actually done. What does that mean in this situation? In that situation, what does it mean to love one another? And yet he's entrusted us with this great responsibility to do so.

So here's this master, the great giver of gifts. He gives talents to all three of these servants. So what was their strategy? Okay, so now I don't know about you, I don't know most of you well enough to know what this is like for you or what it's like for you. But I am, by nature, a fairly risk-averse person. Some people might say, like, conservative, okay. And I always find those who are excellent in business or, like, entrepreneurial, like, they're strange birds to me because I just don't get it. And yet, they're always willing to take risks, to play sort of the calculated hunch. And they have a great energy and excitement for sort of new business ideas. And that's somewhat foreign to me.

But clearly, like, the master was aware of the giftedness of the men that he gave his money to, right? Like, he talented the guys. The guys who were particularly talented in this, or he knew was, were going to do a good job. He gives them a lot. He's aware. So the five and the two-talent servants do exactly what one would expect in this story or in real life. If the master entrusted somebody to a huge amount of money, and they had the ability to deal with it, then one would expect that there would be fruitfulness and production. And that's what happens.

The five and the two-talent servants, it says, the Bible says, they went at once and traded with them. In other words, they were prompt. There was no delay. They got to business. They were active right away. They've been entrusted with things, and now they're going, they're going to be active in their dealing with this. They, as Ecclesiastes says, they cast their bread upon the waters. They, they took some risks, but they obviously traded wisely. They didn't squander the money. And just as we were grateful for that home in Florida, and that gratitude drove us to action, so they were grateful for the opportunity that they had, and they were going to make the most of it. Like, this was their attitude, you know, grateful. And they're going to make the most of the things which they have been given. And now they're active, and they're engaged. They wanted to please the master. They wanted to show that the responsibility and the trust that they had been given was well placed. So they're on that.

But what was the fruit of this strategy? Well, this was great. Five talents became five talents more. Okay, so everybody, even the youngest in this room, are meant to understand, well, maybe not the youngest, but are meant to understand that five talents and five talents is ten talents. So you can add that up and realize that that's good, you know, five and five more. They doubled the money, and they stood before the master and then acknowledged his authority and his good gifts. They said, "Master, you know, you delivered to me this, you did this." And then they were anxious to show him their own success on his behalf. "You know, you gave me these five talents. Here are five more talents." They were glad to show him that.

Note that they never suggest that they ought to keep any of that money for themselves or property for themselves. They didn't ask for more responsibility. They just were glad that they were given this, entrusted with this, and they labored, and it was double the production. And they were glad they wanted to show that to the master.

Now, the one-talent servant, he was completely the opposite. The master was away for a long time, and he was inactive. He did nothing. Well, not exactly nothing. He did the work out of fear. It says that he dug a hole in the ground, and he put the money there. Now, that sounds like not a lot of work, but that does at least take the work where you got to know where it's going to be. I remember at one of the birthday parties, I think it was Anna's, when she was young, she wanted to have a pirate birthday party. And we have this lake by our house. And I said, "Well, what better thing to do than bury all of the gifts that people gave?" And then they have to go and search for the gifts and these kinds of things. So I went out, and I buried it, but I forgot the market. I just figured I'd know. Yeah. Anyway, to took a long time.

So the burying of this talent is all that this guy did. He was largely unproductive. I mean, if he was merely a risk-averse man, right, because I get the one-talent guy. I think I would have been a one-talent guy, but I would have known to put it at least in a CD at 0.001% or whatever you're getting at. I mean, you would have done something with it. But he didn't. He hit it in the ground.

Anyway, after the master returns, he just hands the talent back to him. And in what may be the most important part of this parable, he says this: "I knew you to be a hard man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you scattered no seed." Now, the word translated in your Bibles "hard" means strict or cruel or merciless. That's the idea. "I knew you'd be a hard man like that, a strict man, a cruelty man, a merciless man." Clearly, this servant, by the way, saw the master in a very different way than the other servants did. He goes even further, though, essentially saying that because the master was so cruel, he didn't do anything with the talent. He blames the master for his own sloth and fear and irresponsibility. And then he insults the master, calling him names and saying that he's like this, that he's cruel, that he's hard, that he reaps where he doesn't sow, that it's all unfair.

But this is how so many see our God, the Master, as harsh, strict, merciless. Difficult things happen, and that's interpreted as God being nonexistent or non-caring or unfair. "If God was like this, wouldn't he?" Sometimes even Christians fall into this wrong understanding of the Lord. They can see every decision as something they better get right, or the Lord's going to be very angry with them, and then bad things will happen to them. So when bad things happen, these poor Christians are looking for what did they do that made God so angry at them? You see, they're seeing God as cruel, stern, harsh, strict, merciless.

So I suppose we should ask ourselves, how do we see the master? You know, as we look back at the parable, we see that the master gives these talents, and then the servants implement their strategies, and then the master has a message for each of them, and this is it. To the five and two-talent servants, actually, the Bible says that he gave the same message. Isn't that interesting? So, in other words, the Lord wasn't, the master wasn't interested in, like, the fact that the five guy got him even five talents more, and the two-talent guy only got two talents more. He didn't care. What he cared about was that the way in which they went about the thing which he, that he had entrusted him with, the same message.

The master was as pleased with the person who is less, less talented producing as he was with the more gifted person producing. What did they receive? Well, first, they received the praise of the Master: "Well done, well done, good and faithful servant." If you've been on the receiving end of that, you know what that's like. And I hope that if you've had the opportunity to be on the giving end of that statement, that you've been a person who's been willing to give it. "Well done, good job." The praise of the Master.

And with the praise of the Master came the trust of the Master: "You've been faithful over a little. I will set you over much." Later on, he says, "For to everyone who has, will more be given." And then the greatest thing of all, the joy of the Master: "Enter into the joy of your Master."

Stop for a moment and consider the joy of our Master. Jesus, speaking in a parable, when he comes again at his Second Coming, all of us will have to give an account, like these people, just like these servants. And all true Christians will long to hear the words spoken here by the Master. We want to enter into his joy. This is a joy that's spoken of in the Bible in some of the, like, just more beautiful, open, delighted passages. Things like, "The joy of the Lord is my strength. The joy of the Lord is my strength." David says, "You have, you have put more joy into my heart than my enemies have when their wine and their grain abounds." In other words, all of the wealth, the world, in the hands of those who don't care about God. He says, "You have put more joy in my heart than any happiness that any of that stuff can ever accomplish."

Do you believe that, like, the world's going to offer you everything, every substitute for the joy of the Master? Scripture says that Jesus himself, Jesus himself, for the joy set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame. He was willing to go through all of that for the joy of the Father and the joy of what was going to be accomplished through his sacrifice. And Jesus promises his disciples in another place, right before the cross, right before he goes to the cross, and they're very sad because they realize something's up: "Hey, something's up." And this is what he says. He says, "You have sorrow now, but after the resurrection, I will see you again. And your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you."

You see, the joy of the Master is all tied up in the character of God. You know, we find joy in, in the Lord's, in His light, in his truth, his just glory. We find joy in the kindness of God that bends down to us when we need someone to be kind. And it's the Lord who does that. And what joy comes from knowing that we have a God who is kind to us? And what joy there is in knowing that our Master is wise, he's not a fool. He knows exactly what he's doing. He knows exactly what he's doing in your life. What joy there is in that, and what joy in the generosity of God?

That's what these men understood, the servants. They wanted to enter into the joy of the Master. They understood that he had been generous in his giving. What, what do we deserve? What do any of us deserve? Do we deserve to be breathing? Do we deserve the clothing on our backs? Do we deserve the homes that we live in? Do we deserve the friendships that we have? Do we deserve the salvation that we have in Christ? Do we deserve all these things? Do we come to God saying, "Why don't you do this for me?" Or do we come to him just glad that he's so generous that he would give us everything, his joy, because he's not even doing that, because he has to. He's a robot. He's, you know, like a computer God or something like that who just sort of divvies out. He does that because it gives him joy. He wants to give us good gifts. He delights in it, and we receive that, and we're glad for it.

His righteousness, his holiness, bring us joy. Because we see, here's a God who knows exactly what is right. And when we look at his Son, who is the revelation of God's glory, we see, that is a life I want to live. That's who I want to be like. He gives us the perfect example for us to follow. One day we will, as Christians, as those who, by the power of God's spirit, will endure all the way to the end. We will look at Jesus, and he will look at us, and we will receive what we want and get tastes of now. We will receive it in the fullest measure that you could possibly ever know. You will know the joy of your Master.

These are the great words that will be spoken to all who are true followers of Christ on the day of his coming: "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of your Master." But what about the one-talent servant? Well, he received the judgment of the Master: "You wicked and slothful servant." And he received the probing of the Master. Because the Master wasn't willing to just let him sort of say these insults. He kind of probes him. He says, "Oh, really? Do you see me this way? Do you really see me as a hard man? Well, if you saw me as a hard man, why don't you invest the money in the bank? Why don't you just at least do something?" The Master's suggesting that the servant wasn't making any sense. If the master was that way, wouldn't the servant have tried to keep him from being angry at him by doing something? No, he was just slothful and wicked.

Because, you see, well, one more thing. He received the wrath of the Master. Says that he ordered other servants to cast the worthless servant into the outer darkness. In that place, there'll be weeping and gnashing of teeth. "For from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away." Everything is gone. Everything is gone. That's the division that God speaks of in the Second Coming of Christ. For those who are in Christ, there is the joy of the Master. For those who are outside of Christ, everything is gone. Even what you had. Even the good gifts that God had give, given are taken away.

You see, the wicked servant wasn't really afraid of the master. The wicked servant wanted nothing to do with the master. He didn't believe there was such a thing as the joy of the master. So the wicked, sinful servant insulted him. Likely, he hated the other servants for their success. He lived a life of ignorance, thinking that the master was someone who he was not. And so he did nothing with the gifts and with the talent that that servant had been given.

Friends, what will you do with the gift of life? What will you do with the gifts that God gives you? I mean, we should all, of course, look to Jesus as our example. Christ came. He humbled himself. He took the form of a servant. How did he invest the life that he had been given? What did he do? Well, he poured out his life. And the reward, the fruit of that pouring out, was a kingdom, a holy nation, a people for God's own possession, a harvest. There was nothing but good fruit from his work. Salvation came from this great work of Christ. And now he enters into the joy of his Father's presence. Now he sits at his right hand, and he rules, and he reigns. So we can look at Jesus as our example.

We can also follow the Scripture's call. The Apostle Peter says this. He says, "As each one of you have received a gift, then use it." I love it. "If you receive it, use it to serve one another as good stewards of God's varied grace. We're all not the same. Whoever speaks, as one who speaks the oracles of God, whoever serves, as one who serves by the strength that God supplies, in order that in everything God may be glorified through Jesus Christ. To him belong glory and dominion forever and ever."

We can follow the Scripture's call. If you've been given, then use those things for the glory of God and the good of others. And we can also, with gratitude, give all that we have, the Lord, in service, asking for his blessing on our efforts. That's the sentiment of the hymn that we sing: "Take my life and let it be. Take my life, take my hands, take my voice, my silver, my gold, my will, my love. Take it. Let it all be used for the glory of God. Take it, you Lord, show me what you would have me do."

And then, finally, we can take the warning of the one servant to heart and never hide the treasure that we have. As Christians, we have the gospel, the good news that Jesus died, that our sins might be forgiven, and that eternal life and so much more is given as a gift to all who believe in him. It is never to be hidden. It is a light that is to be set on a hill. The Gospel.

Jesus is coming again. We have been entrusted with money, with bodies, with a will, with the capacity to love, with families, with friends, with neighbors, with co-workers, with particular God-given gifts for the blessing of others, with a life. And as Christians, with the greatest treasure of all, with the Gospel itself. May we invest it, invest it all. May we grow in our knowledge and love and admiration of the Master. And may we, by the power of the Holy Spirit working in us, bear such good fruit that we can't wait till the day when Jesus returns so that we can show him. "You gave us five talents. Here's five more. Thank you for the opportunity. Thank you for saving my life. Thank you. Thank you for making my life mean something. Thank you for giving me everything that I have so that I might give it to other people. Thank you, Lord Jesus." And then he'll look, and he'll say, "Enter into the joy of your Master. Well done. Well done."

Let's pray.
