Good morning. You can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 9. We are looking together in the Bible in the New Testament at the Gospel of Matthew. It tells us the story of Jesus. The first part gave us the background. It sets us up to hear about His ministry. It tells us that Jesus is in the line of David, the King of Israel, and it talks about His miraculous birth and His baptism by His cousin John, His connection to His Father in Heaven, and His being tempted by the devil. Matthew tells us that John is eventually arrested, that his message of repentance and that the Kingdom of God was near was not very well received by those who were in power.

When Jesus hears this, that John was arrested, He moves the center of His ministry north out from Jerusalem to a place called Capernaum, a town on the Sea of Galilee. We've been taking a closer look at what the ministry of Jesus entailed. Then and now, just a message of repentance because the Kingdom of God was near, because the King was there, and that this is our message today as His followers. Jesus lived, and He died, and He rose again, and He calls people to repentance and faith in Him, the One who is the King over all things.

For several weeks now, we've considered Jesus calling people to follow Him and what that means, and we've talked about why they should do that and why we should do that. Up to this point, Jesus had been demonstrating both the desirability and the wisdom of following Him by showing His authority over things. He taught with authority. He showed His authority over disease and authority over creation and the calming of the sea. The authority over the forces of evil and darkness and casting out demons. The authority over sin itself as He offered forgiveness to people, and He had shown that He was of a different category of man, so much so that people would ask, "What sort of man is this that can do these kinds of things?"

Then last week, the question from John while he was in prison kind of arose, and it was a question of, "Is this the one?" We see Jesus demonstrating that He is the King, that He is the Savior, that He is the Christ by raising a little girl from the dead, by healing a woman who was ritually unclean, by healing two blind men, and by casting out a demon, thus enabling a mute man to speak. All of these miracles of God's grace and proof to John that Jesus is the one. He is the Christ. He is the man. And the Bible tells us that because of all this, as you could imagine, if someone even today was around doing these kinds of things, the fame that he had grew throughout the region where he was ministering. People came from everywhere to see Jesus. Crowds gathered.

And today what we've seen is Jesus interacting personally with those who have been sick or oppressed in some way, with those who are listening to Him, to hear what He has to say about life. And we've seen these kinds of personal interactions between people and Jesus, but today we're going to consider His more sort of general view, we might say, the general view of Christ. What He sees when He sees the crowds that inevitably come wherever He is. So we're going to look at what He sees when He sees the crowds and then what He's prepared to do about it, which will give us a hint of how the expansion of God's kingdom into the world was going to come about. So that's what we're going to look at this morning, Matthew chapter 9, beginning at verse 35.

Hear the word of the Lord: "Therefore, pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into His harvest." And He called to Him His 12 disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits to cast them out and to heal every disease and every affliction. The names of the 12 apostles are these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew, his brother, James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the tax collector, James, the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed Him.

This is the word of the Lord this morning.

Most people are fairly uncomfortable with public speaking. Talking in front of a crowd, even a small one, gets people's hands shaking. Maybe the voice wobbling a little bit, nervousness sets in, the odd mannerisms going. One of the things that they did, which I think was pretty helpful for people if it wasn't too embarrassing, was in seminary training. They would go through these sort of fake preaching classes. I don't know what I think about that, but here's what I thought was kind of interesting they would do. They would film you preaching. Filming somebody in their public speaking sort of way, when they're not very comfortable speaking publicly, can kind of generate some like, "Ooh, I do that." I think that if all of us, if I had each of you stand up here and we filmed you, I would probably suggest to you that many of you would feel quite uncomfortable in that place.

People who teach public speaking will try to give you some tips and maybe they help, but the reality is that most people would rather be in a crowd listening than actually being the one talking to the crowd. Jesus never had that choice. He was always, everywhere He went, He was always surrounded by crowds who wanted to hear Him speak. He wasn't nervous about speaking to them. He boldly proclaimed the gospel of the kingdom. He wasn't worried about Himself and how He looked, and so He could do that. He would look out at the crowds and He would see them. He would see the crowds. That's what we hear about in this morning's text. It begins by giving sort of a summary of Jesus' activity. It says that He was teaching in the synagogues. He was speaking to people about the Bible, passages that spoke about the coming of the Christ. Jesus would speak to the Jews in their regular services. And then He was proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom, good news about God's care for His people and the sending of a king that all should repent and turn to God. And at the time the kingdom was close, even like right in front of them, He would proclaim this message of the kingdom. And He would heal every disease and affliction. He would prove that He is the one, the Messiah, the Christ. And He would do that while showing compassion and power and authority. And then He saw the crowds.

Now Jesus wasn't interested in large crowds so that His fame would increase even more, that He would become the most popular preacher in all of Judea. That wasn't His goal. He didn't look at the crowds and think proudly of like, "Wow, look how many people I've gathered today. You know, who was missing from the town? We've really got to go and touch base with them." He just saw the crowds and this is what He saw. He saw sheep. He saw people who were harassed and helpless. When they gathered around Him to listen to Him and He looked out on them, that's what He saw. He saw sheep, helpless and harassed. And the Bible says here that He had compassion for them. He saw people who were beaten down by their own religious leaders, whose teaching had actually led them away from the Lord, religious leaders who had honored the Lord with their lips while their hearts were far from Him. People, religious leaders who believed that Jesus' authority, that Jesus Himself was a threat and not a king. Those were their leaders. And so He saw them beaten down, harassed and helpless because of these leaders. And He saw them also needy in their sin. The reason why they needed to know the Lord was because of their sin. The failing of the religious leaders was that they didn't direct them rightly on how to deal with the fundamental problem of being a person. He saw them needy in their sin. He saw their physical and mental and emotional and spiritual hurts. And He had compassion for them. They were like sheep without a shepherd. They were ripe for the wolves, ripe for the enemy himself who were reminded in the Bible, prowls around like a roaring lion seeking someone to devour. Jesus knew this. And He looked out on the crowds and what He saw was helpless, harassed sheep. I believe He'd look at crowds today and see the exact same thing. Sinners weighed down by their sin. They were helpless, harassed, abused by others and abusing others. Self-medicating in a million different ways. Wandering around without hope, damaged, resistant to change, ignorant of God's ways and of His grace. He would look at crowds and see harassed and helpless and hopeless sheep.

What do you see when you look at crowds? I mean, when we look at others, do we just sort of evaluate their worth or value based on whether they share our opinions on some social issue that we see? Do we see people as what their opinions are? Are we largely indifferent to the crowd? We're in crowds a lot. Are we largely indifferent to the crowd? Everybody's kind of out there on their own. I'm on my own too, just making my best way in this world. Are we just trying to fit in? Because, of course, everybody knows that the safest place to be is just to fit in. Don't be that different. Is that how we see the crowds? Is the crowd sort of like what an opinion poll says would have any meaning at all to you or to I? Do we care in that way? Like we want to just got to sort of stay where the majority is all the time? Do we envy? Man, I wish that, you know, I'm a Christian, so I know that means I can't do certain things, but boy,

 sometimes I wish. Do we look at the crowd and we think that they're not helpless and hopeless, but actually they've got a little something that we don't got? They get to do XYZ, and I don't get to because I'm a Christian. Do we lust after the things that they have? Do we lust after them? Do we look down on them? Do we see the crowd and we see like, "Well, Jesus, I'm a Christian," and we forget that we were saved from death and hell and our own sin, and we begin to see others as the Pharisees essentially saw them. Sinners, but not in the way that Jesus sees sinners, but as those who are a little bit below us. What do you see when you see the crowds? Famous people today, Jesus would have been absolutely famous in His time, famous people today when they see crowds they see fans. And if you're lucky, if you're lucky, you can get an autograph from somebody, you know? I mean, there would have been so many people who would want Jesus to sign something in our day. Just let, I don't need, you know, enough of this sort of touching for healing. All I need is a signature on a notepad that said I was there. Famous people see fans. Maybe they grace us with a signature or with a picture with them. Political leaders, they see constituents. They look at a crowd and see constituents or if they're a king maybe he sees his subjects or maybe they see, they look out and they see there's all the workers. Or maybe, you know, this time of year that we have to go through over and over again is maybe what they see is votes when they look out at a crowd. Jesus sees sheep. It's a sad picture. It must have been difficult to look at and see right into the heart and know that all of these people were lost, wandering sinners in need of a shepherd, a king, a savior. Christ looks at the heart. He sees ours. He sees any crowd of people anywhere that He would walk into even today and He can see all the way into the depths. It must have been a sad picture. What they need was a good shepherd. And Jesus would of course call Himself that, the good shepherd. He sees sheep and those who belong to Him, those of us who are believers, know Him as our shepherd, as our shepherd. You and I, we're no different than any of those in the crowd in this way. We're sheep. We're all sinners in need of a shepherd. Jesus today calls you to Himself. Jesus today calls you to Himself to believe and trust Him as your shepherd and I hope that all of you have done that. I hope that you will do that if you haven't. Jesus looks at any crowd and He sees them in this way like sheep without a shepherd but the text doesn't end there. It moves from a sad picture to a hopeful one, from the sheep picture to one of a great harvest. So when our boys were little and we were trying to occupy them with something, I was the kind of dad that would want to occupy them a lot of times with like work. So for a couple of summers the boys worked for Hopkins Farm down here and they would follow behind. We'd give them up very early in the morning and they would follow behind the truck and they would pick corn and cantaloupes and sort tomatoes. And it was a great job for them and it was a great job for us because we got to have free produce. But there was always plenty to do. And I don't know about you, I mean I grew up in this county, in this place and one of the things that you sort of get used to and you really like about being here is like you see when everything gets planted and everything starts to grow and you kind of know when the corn, I like corn, so you kind of know when it's coming. And it's always sort of exciting to think about that harvest and all of that sort of delicious, that time where we just can really get a lot of very good, excellent local food grown right here in our little county.

Jesus is speaking to His disciples here and He's looking out at this crowd and He's seeing these sheep without a shepherd and He changes the metaphor right away and He says to His disciples, He says, "The harvest is plentiful. It's so abundant." You see, He sees the sheep without the shepherd but He looks at the same crowd and He says, "But there's a harvest here." He sees the people as sheep but also as a harvest. There's so much hope here. Harassed and helpless isn't ever the end of the story. The gospel will change people. The gospel will change you. If you believe and trust in Christ you cannot remain the same. The gospel will change you. The gospel changes people and not just you. The gospel changes lots of people. Here in this room, a hundred or so around the world, millions of people. Jesus looks at the crowd and He says the harvest. Millions. Problem. The harvest is plentiful but the laborers are few. You see there's an issue. Someone's going to have to speak to and minister to all these sheep. And Jesus can't physically be in multiple cities all at the same time. He's not able to do that. Others are going to take His message into the world. Christians will need to lead other people to Christ. It's the only way that it will work. This is the way that the Lord has chosen to spread the good news of the coming of the kingdom, of Christ's coming, of His death and His resurrection, His ascension. It's through people, through laborers, through Christians, through you, through me. There are only a few though, because this is at the beginning, who Jesus could find to be the laborers or at least the first laborers in the harvest field. By what means would more come then and now? Well, He says the harvest is plentiful but the laborers are few and then He tells His disciples what to do. He says, "Therefore pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into His harvest." I love it. The Lord is the Lord of the harvest. It is His harvest. His field, His people, His way, everything belongs to Him. It's His harvest. He began the work in a person's heart. He will be finishing that work in the person's heart and He will do that through the work of His laborers who He will send into His harvest to do the collecting of His crop, His people. But the laborers are few. Well, what can we do? Well, we pray for there to be more laborers. We pray that there would be those with evangelistic hearts, with hearts that would want to see the gospel go forward into the world. We pray for those hearts for ourselves, that we would not become people who are okay with looking at a crowd with indifference, but rather that we would see a harvest. There's a principle here, actually, that needs really of any kind at all ought to drive us to prayer. Here's the harvest and Jesus says pray that there will be laborers who go out into the harvest, but not only is the Lord the Lord of the harvest, He's the Lord of the creation. All things belong to Him and when we are in need, prayer ought to be our first action. We're praying for the person, for the one who rules over everything to act. Is anyone sick? The Bible says pray. You lost your job? You in financial trouble? Pray. Relationships not going very well? Pray. Struggling with that same old sin? Pray. Pray, pray, pray. Pray to the Lord of all creation. Pray to the Lord of harvest. For what? Notice that Jesus doesn't say pray that the Father will just take care of it. That would be the prayer that most of us want. Here's the big harvest. Father, work in them and just let them believe because it seems kind of hard to be a laborer. If you interviewed my kids about what it was like to pick corn for a couple hours even and to do all that, they probably had fun when they were kids, but if you asked them to do that for a living and do that for 10 hours a day, it might be a different answer to the question. Laboring is labor. Jesus doesn't ask the Father or tell us to ask the Father to just take care of the harvest. He says pray that the Lord would send people who will labor in this harvest. We might pray that the Lord in our difficulties would just change the circumstances and make things easy for us. I've been a Christian for a while and that prayer I'm sure I've uttered before and it rarely happens, where just all the circumstances change and suddenly everything is fine. He answers prayer by sending laborers. The harvest isn't miraculously harvested. People are involved and so it is with us. When we pray through our troubles, we pray that the Lord would bring the laborers into our lives that we need, that we might labor alongside them, those who might help us with the difficulties we face. The harvest required people and all of our troubles also require people. We pray that the Lord would provide that, laborers.

Jesus sees the crowd and then He says to His disciples that they ought to pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest for some laborers. Jesus Himself would set the example here and we see the transition from Jesus doing everything to beginning to work through His disciples. There, beginning of chapter 10, He called to Him His 12 disciples. So Jesus up to this point, He's been the sole minister so to speak. He's been the one who's been doing everything. If you work in a business, you know what it's like to be entrusted with some authority to accomplish this or that thing. Some project you're responsible for, those in charge of you or paying you have entrusted you with some authority to get the job done. If you are a child

 in this room, most, and especially if you are not the youngest child, you know what it's like to be asked by your parents or instructed by your parents to take care of the younger one that you are in charge. Using that phrase, by the way, parental advice is not a good phrase to use. But essentially, you're putting them in charge. You're entrusting them with authority for a while, and that's because bosses and parents can't be in multiple places at once and accomplish everything all by themselves. So they assign and give authority to do certain tasks. Of course, a work project is one thing, and making sure younger siblings don't destroy the house is another thing. But what an amazing thing it is that Jesus the King gives His authority out to laborers like us, that His kingdom would spread into all the world. Do you think about that? I mean, if you're a business owner, you're entrusting people who are competent to do important things. Jesus entrusted the expansion of the kingdom into all the world into people like James and John who, when the Gentiles hacked them off a little bit, said, "Lord, you want us to send fire and destroy these infidels." Like, this is who He entrusted the gospel going into all the world. He entrusted it to people like us who are weak, who are doubting, who are helpless, and our strength is so little. He entrusts us with the gospel to go into all the world. It seems like a way too great of a task to entrust saved sinners with, and yet that's what He does. There it is. It's just right in the text. That's what He does. He starts with the 12. It says Jesus called to Himself 12 disciples. Twelve very likely would remind the people of the 12 tribes. It's hinting at a future where the church would be the heir of all blessings that would be promised to the nation of Israel. That we would be, as Peter says, a holy nation, a royal priesthood, a people for God's own possession, a chosen race, those who are heirs to the promises given to Abraham and to Israel. But He has these 12 disciples, and it says that He gives them authority, gave them authority over unclean spirits to cast them out and to heal every disease and every affliction.

Now imagine. This is like, Matthew was a tax collector. He had the authority to hack people off by demanding revenue. That was the extent. And now Matthew can go with somebody, and because Jesus has given him authority, someone sick can come to him and Matthew can say, "In the name of Christ, you're healed," and that it would work. Now, I don't know about you, but that is an authority that is not one that I'm glad that we have in our midst anymore. Could you handle it? They couldn't, by the way. They'd come later and they'd tell Jesus about all the awesome things that they did, right? Because they thought Jesus was about that, about doing awesome things. "We did this in Your name, and we did that in Your name, and you should see it, everything." And Jesus is like, "Man, just be glad that your names are written in the book of life. That's what's important." He gives them this authority to do these things, and He gives us the authority to preach, to teach, to make disciples of all nations, to baptize people in the name of the Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit. Like, we have an authority also given by God, and it's the authority to bring the gospel into the world. That's the authority we've been given. The 12 names are listed. We know some things about some of them, and others we know like absolutely nothing about. The only thing that we would know is stuff that would come in legends that were made about them. People like Thaddeus. We know some about Peter, James, John, and of course Judas who betrayed Him. We know they came from all walks of life and we know that Jesus knew their name. Up to this point, He addresses people in that kind of warm way that we've talked about before, where He'll say things like, "Take heart, my son," or "My daughter." Like, He wants them to know that He cares for them, and that's how we hear Him talking to them. But here He takes it a step further. These sons, these dear sons of His, they have names. And names, the naming of them means that there's going to be a relationship that we're going to see worked out in the Bible. There's going to be engagement with them. He names them. He knows their names. It also means that the Lord isn't going to use them. They are not human resources to accomplish the missions project of evangelizing the world. They will not be human resources. The Lord will not use them. The Lord is going to save them. He is going to love them. He is going to disciple them, and He is going to gift them with great purpose and work. These men. This man named Simon called Peter. He was a fisherman. And there was this man named Andrew who was his brother. And a man named James, the son of another man, Zebedee, and John, his brother. And they also were fishermen. And so He is going to save these men and love them and disciple them and gift them to take the gospel into the world. And not just them, but this man Philip and another man Bartholomew and Thomas and then Matthew who wrote this book, who had lived a life of just this kind of tax collecting underworld. And then there was this Simon the zealot man. He was sort of an insurrectionist. And the Lord was going to gift him with the ability to not only heal disease in this sort of limited fashion, but also to take the gospel into all the world. He named that man. And then, oh, and He names James the son of Alphaeus so we don't confuse him with the son of Zebedee, the one that everybody knows. Some of the places where the disciples are listed call him James the Lesser. That's too bad. But still, James has this name that's important. James the Lesser could heal disease and could take the gospel into all the world. Jesus named him and He discipled him and He loved him and He cared for him. And you know what? The worst part of all this is that one of the men listed on this list, He did all those things for him. Judas Iscariot who would betray Him. Judas wasn't used by Jesus and then turned out to be not that good of an employee. But in the same way, Jesus loved him and discipled him and gave him the same gifts as the others. They began as disciples but these 12 would become known as Jesus' apostles, those who were sent. Disciples, that word means like a follower, a learner, somebody who's sitting under the teaching of someone. The apostle is someone who's sent out so those who were taught weren't meant to simply listen to Jesus and try to follow His teaching. They were meant to go out and say something to the world. And so it is with us. Of course, the 12 are special. They are the apostles. But the Lord continues to send His people into the world today. People with names that He knows. When I was thinking about the sermon at this point, in the sermon I was going to start naming people, but then I thought, well then I wouldn't name other people. And then maybe the people that I would name wouldn't like it that I didn't ask them to name them. So I'm not naming any of you. But the Lord knows all of your names. Isn't that something? He's not interested in using you as a resource. He's interested in saving your soul and then loving you, caring for you, discipling you, teaching you, training you, and then sending you out in the world with a message that a helpless, hopeless world so desperately needs. The Lord sends out people who have believed and embraced the gospel by faith, who know that the gospel, that it's Christ alone. By faith alone. By grace alone. And that message is the message that the world needs. A world of sheep who live every day as if there is no good shepherd. And yet we know there is a good shepherd. A world that is a harvest field. A world that needs laborers. Pray for laborers. Be laborers. Go into the fields with the gospel of Jesus Christ and may His kingdom expand here in Harford, Cecil County. And may it expand into all the world. Praise be to God.

Let's pray. Father in heaven, we are grateful that when you saw us sheep without a shepherd, you sent your only Son into the world. That we might be healed. That we might be comforted in our sorrow. That we might be ministered to in our suffering. And that one day we might be raised from the dead. That we might have a shepherd. Lord Jesus, we praise you for the glorious compassion and kindness you have displayed in our lives and the lives of those that we love. Holy Spirit, stir up our hearts to go into the world with the gospel, to labor in the fields that are ready to harvest all for the good of others and the glory of Christ. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray these things. Amen.