Good morning. An old crab said to her son, "Why do you walk sideways like that, my son? You ought to walk straight." The young crab replied, "Show me how, dear mother, and I'll follow your example." The old crab tried, but tried in vain, and then saw how foolish she had been to find fault with her child. The moral of the story is, "Example is better than precept, Esop's Fables."

I had an Esop's Fables book when I was a kid. I used to love the story. Half of the morals I never really understood what they were talking about. But the story, they always had talking animals and those kinds of things, and they were always trying to make a point. Stories of animals and simple moral lessons, some of the lessons made sense, others were less clear, but there was always that statement right there at the end. "The moral of the story is, this is what was meant."

Over the next few weeks, what we're going to look at together as a congregation are parables. That word literally means to throw something alongside something else. It means to compare. And so parables are short stories or pictures that are compared to some real things, like our crabs and a moral.

Some parables were given to the crowds generally, and some parables Jesus spoke to just his disciples. What was different about Jesus' parables is that often the disciples would get to hear what the parables actually meant, and the crowds wouldn't. They wouldn't be given the second half of the comparison. They simply would be told the story. No explanation, just the story.

Today, we're going to begin our look at this section of Matthew and Matthew 13, where all these parables are, and we're going to consider this question: Why did Jesus speak that way? I mean, why not just be a straight shooter? Give it to them straight. Meet them where they're at with the truth.

The disciples, they kind of wanted to know this. They were there when all this was happening, of course, and they're listening to Jesus talk, and they're considering the very real possibility that the crowds that are listening to Jesus and Jesus being very important, the disciples thought they would want to know what Jesus had to say. They wondered, "Why does Jesus do this this way? Why do you speak to them," they ask, "and why do you speak to them in parables? Why would you leave open the possibility that they would be confused at all? Why do you speak to them in parables?"

This is the word of the Lord today from Matthew 13. We're going to look at verses 10 through 17, and then skip to verses 34 and 35 that talk to us about this question.

Here's the word of the Lord: "Then the disciples came and said to him, 'Why do you speak to them in parables?' And he answered them, 'To you, it has been given to know the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them, it has not been given. For to the one who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance, but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.'"

"This is why I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor do they understand. Indeed, in their case, the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled that says, 'You will indeed hear, but never understand; you will indeed see, but never perceive. For this people's heart has grown dull, and with their ears, they can barely hear, and their eyes they have closed, lest they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn, and I would heal them. But blessed are your eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear. For truly I say to you, all prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see, and did not see it, and to hear what you hear, and did not hear it.'"

And then a little later on in verse 34, "All these things Jesus said to the crowds in parables; indeed, he said nothing to them without a parable. This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet: 'I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter what has been hidden since the foundation of the world.'"

Word of the Lord this morning. "I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter what has been hidden since the foundation of the world." This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet. In other words, Matthew is declaring that this is how Jesus is supposed to speak. This is the way it's supposed to happen. It's a fulfillment. It fulfills something particular that was said in the Old Testament, which we're going to look at in a second.

But what he will be telling parables for is not to give like a moral lesson like Aesop's Crabs. He's going to be telling the Bible's say secrets hidden things that were from the foundation of the world. And that are meant to be revealed. In fact, they must be revealed. They're not meant to remain hidden.

And so Jesus is going to speak in a way that that which is hidden has been hidden will in fact be revealed. That is what the gospel, the good news, is actually. It is a revelation. It is a revealing of things.

And so what kinds of secrets is he going to reveal? Do we all become Christians so that we can learn the secret handshake? What kind of secrets is Jesus revealing to us? Well, to figure that out, we simply need to look back at what Matthew is quoting here. This is from Psalm 78. This is part where he says, "I will open my mouth and a parable. And I will utter dark sayings, hidden sayings, from of old, things that we have heard and known that our fathers told us we will not hide them from our children."

Psalm 78 goes on to speak about what dark sayings, what hidden things need to be revealed. And this is what it says. It says, "This is what needs to be proclaimed. Tell of the glorious deeds of the Lord and His might and all the wonders that He has done." That's what must be revealed. That the next generation would do the following three things: Set their hope in God. Not forget the works of God and keep His commandments. And in that they would not be like their fathers who were a stubborn and rebellious generation. The Psalmist says, whose heart wasn't steadfast and whose spirit wasn't faithful to God.

In the Psalm, the Psalmist then goes on to tell the story of Israel's rebellion against God. Of the Lord's disciplining them. And then in the end, the peace, the hidden peace, the real revelation in the Psalm was that He would choose a shepherd king, King David, to shepherd God's people. That was the hidden truth that the writer of Psalm 78 was revealing. All that had happened in the history of God's people had brought them to this place where God saw fit to establish a shepherd king. The Psalmist wanted the people to know this so that they would follow their king, follow their God and not turn their hearts away.

The scriptures in general fundamentally reveal a true story that would have been hidden except that the Lord revealed it to us in the scriptures. And this is the story. The story is about the rebellion of mankind against God, their creator. That fundamentally each one of us is a sinner. Generally that began with Adam and Eve. And then more specifically it's demonstrated or shown in the Bible in the actions of God's people, the people of Israel and the Old Testament. And then even more specifically we're shown how it's true for every human heart that we're all sinners, that we all fall short of the glory of God, that all of us is sinned. Everyone, no one can go before God and say, "No, really I'm good enough, I'm just like you." The Bible's revelation is that God made us a different way, but that we sin. A hidden thing revealed.

And then the second part is that it's a story of salvation by God's grace. And over and over again in the Old Testament, we see the Lord saving His people not because they're all that great, but because He's that great, because of His grace. The central example of that being the rescue of God's people from slavery in Egypt, bringing them out and putting them into the promised land. And that would be like the model that we would see God use for saving His people. God's love and His faithfulness drive it all, but we see that sin remains and plagues God's people. And so what He does is He sends His Son to sacrifice Himself, to take on the sins of His people on the cross, and all who believe in Him will receive forgiveness and everlasting life.

We see that the majority of the people reject Him and so reject God's salvation. But some receive Him and these are the ones who are described in the Bible as bearing good fruit, as being faithful, blessed, forgiven, hope-filled.

So it's a story of salvation by grace. And then it's a story of the people of God in the world and not of the world. It's a story of a suffering people, a people who have their eyes fixed on the Lord, fixed on Christ, a joyful people, a singing people, a people who believe and hope in the resurrection and eternal life, a story of God's spirit working through this people to proclaim the gospel and do good deeds. And at the center of it all is Jesus. He is the true shepherd king to whom the David of Psalm 78 points. And that's the hidden revelation that Jesus is giving. It's not like what we think of, like I said, the secret handshake. It's not like that. It's not that kind of thing. It's just you couldn't have come up with this ourselves. The Lord has revealed everything to us. All knowledge is revealed to us by Him.

So Jesus is going to be revealing that story, the story of the kingdom and Himself as the king. And He's doing it in parables because Psalm 78 said that's the way that it ought to be done. I'm going to tell you parables. He's not going to let anything remain hidden because the gospel is a revelation. But the gospel does something else. And we've got to look back to the first section of what we read this morning to see that.

The disciples came and said, why do you speak to them in parables? And then he goes on. And if you were listening carefully, if you were attending, what you would have heard is that a lot of it was sort of like negative. He says things like, this is why I speak to them in parables because seeing, they don't see; hearing, they don't hear; they don't understand. And this people's heart has grown dull. And I just talked in parables because if they saw, they heard, they might understand, they'd turn, I'd heal them, but they don't really want that. It was a pretty, pretty downer. And that's because the gospel, the revelation of Jesus Christ, divides. It just does.

This passage we read today declares that Jesus speaks in parables to fulfill something else, something which Isaiah said that the gospel would divide. The parables are meant to divide. When you listen to the parables, as we'll be doing together, you will see that they will, in fact, divide. The parables are warnings for some and are encouragement for others. For some, the parables are proclamations of good news, and for others, they are proclamations of judgment. For some, Jesus' life, we've learned before, was foolishness, but to others, it's wisdom and salvation. When the Lord reveals things to us, it automatically divides. Some are encouraged, some are warned, some, it's good news; some, it's judgment.

And on one side of that divide, the Bible describes Jesus speaking, and he describes those who are blind and deaf, and he's talking about the crowd, and that's what he's basically saying that most of the crowd is. Most of the people that would come and listen to him talk. We have a really hard time with that. It's not because we have this kind of fundamental sense that we really actually care about a lot of people, and what we concern ourselves with is like, why is it that when you speak things that are like true and good that people don't just embrace them? We have a hard time thinking that that just wouldn't work. But here it is, it doesn't. There are some who will be in the crowd, and to them it has not been given, Jesus says, to you, to the disciples, he says, to you it's been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them, it has not been given. To them, it hasn't been given to know the secrets of the kingdom, to know the king and what he's about. They will hear the kingdom parables, they will come, and they will listen to the gospel declared in a story without the second part, without the comparison. They'll hear the story, and they won't be curious. They'll either be confused about what he's talking about, or they'll be just disinterested.

I mean, it's interesting that what the disciples do shows the model because what'll happen is they'll hear something that Jesus says and they don't understand what he's talking about, and guess what they do. They say, what are you talking about? They ask, they're curious. Jesus says there will be people who will hear him, they'll hear the Bible, they'll hear all kinds of things. They won't want to ask. And to them, they will hear the kingdom parables, but they will in no way be curious. They'll be confused, disinterested, and then they will become less. He says, for the one who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance, but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away. One of the sad things about unbelief is that unbelief makes a person less. And as life goes on and unbelief is sort of retained, the person becomes less and less. Further and further away. The parables speak truth, the hidden mystery of the kingdom, but instead of asking what the disciples ask, what do these mean, they'll simply move on. And in so doing, they will prove some things which Isaiah points out in this text. He says that they'll have eyes that saw Jesus, but they didn't see. And they'll have ears that listened to Jesus, but they didn't hear. And they don't understand. And they don't ask.

That's the experience I think that many of us who have been Christians for a long time, that we experience when you share the gospel or you talk to other people about your faith. It is far more likely that when you do that you will be countered with either some sort of like a more aggressive, that's not what I believe kind of thing. It can be that either be countered, or sometimes it'll be just that sort of apathetic, like that's great for you. It'll just be kind of ignored. That's far more likely than a concern to understand what one must do to be saved. I think it's fair to say that's generally the experience that most of us will have when we share our faith. Occasionally, someone might be interested to hear more. Most of the time there's either sort of antagonistic or just apathetic.

And that's what Jesus is talking about. The parables, then, him speaking about the kingdom, they become part of the fulfillment of Isaiah's words, prophetic words of judgment. He says that their hearts will become, they've grown dull, their ears are almost completely deaf, their eyes are closed, and then he hits this piece right here. He says they won't repent. That's the picture. That's the biggest picture of a closed ear, a closed eye, deafened blind. They won't repent. Thus they see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their heart, and turn, and I would heal them. They won't repent and be healed. That is the bitter truth. People do not want to turn and to be healed. To be saved from the penalty and the power, the presence of sin. How do we know that people don't want to turn and be healed? We know they don't want to because they didn't. They saw Jesus do miracles and they didn't turn. They heard everything that Jesus said and they didn't turn. And not only then was their hearts, they showed that their hearts were hard, their hearts became harder. The more they listened and rejected, the more they saw and rejected. The Lord calls all people to turn to Jesus that they might be healed and to not harden your heart. And that's what He says to each of us here today. Do not harden your heart. Turn to Christ. Turn to Him and if you're having difficulty, don't just say like, well, I'm just going to move on. I've heard some words that Jesus says, I'm moving on. Turn to Him and ask, what does this mean? How can I be saved? How would you have me live? This is a terrible situation. What would you have me do? Will you please increase my faith? Will you please grow me in my love for other people? Will you soften my heart? Will you give me a real hope in this life? Ask. Don't harden. You see, Jesus gives out these parables that speak about the kingdom, and people walk away from it. That's just because the truth is that the gospel divides.

So the disciples ask Jesus why parables, and it may be that they become kind of concerned. I'm thinking as Jesus is talking, maybe you're listening and they're listening and they become concerned that maybe they would fall into the category of blind, deaf, dull-hearted. Maybe they're concerned about themselves, and so Jesus encourages them with the following words. He says, but blessed are your eyes for they see and your ears for they hear. For truly I say to you, many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see and didn't see it, and to hear what you hear and did not hear it.

I have a house. We have a large window that looks out on our backyard where we have a couple of bird feeders and a garden, and we sometimes sit in the mornings and will just look out that window as we're eating breakfast. And after 20 plus years of living in the same spot, we've grown accustomed to seeing cardinals and blue jays and doves and sparrows and finches and so on, and maybe we know a couple of facts from bird books about them, right? But mostly we've just watched. And then sort of remarkably, something happens where something will fly by or fly in that the wings are just kind of like they're off. They don't just look the same as what you're used to, or the color isn't exactly right. And what you sort of sit and reflect and realize is that after 20 years, you've never really seen that particular bird before, and you get your bird book, you look it up, and you find out what it is, and it makes you happy to find something new and interesting, and you hope it comes back.

Most of the knowledge that I have about birds comes from what has been revealed at that window, and you find that after 20 some years, you kind of know a lot about birds because you have the window, and you spend the time to look out the window. And Jesus is saying to his disciples, you've been given the window. Back in verse 11, to you it's been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them, it hasn't been given, but to you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven. It's not like they've been given the secret handshake or inner workings of some strange secret society. They have been given the truth about Jesus, and they have embraced that truth. That is a gift of God to them. They've been given the secret to life. They've been given the secret that the kingdom of God has arrived and that Jesus is the king. And the parables, the stories that you find, they're very interesting to the disciples. They want to know what they mean, and then they observe how true they are. How everything that Jesus says actually fleshes itself out as reality. Christians grow over time and acknowledging just how true God's Word is as they observe His world and the people around them. It's a window. The parables are a window. Here it is. Sit, look out a bit. I think you might see something interesting. And for them, Jesus says, this is only going to grow. For the one who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. Even as my own knowledge of birds has grown by sitting at a window and looking out at the disciples receive Jesus's Word is true. They love His revelation, and they grow in their knowledge of Him and in their knowledge of the kingdom of God and what He's doing in the world. They grow in that.

And I need to say something here because knowledge is something which confuses people nowadays because sometimes we equate knowledge with information, and there's just so far distant. I don't need a window to get information about birds. I can read about them in books, and I can look at screens of a variety of sorts to find out information about birds. I could shut the blinds. I could tuck myself in a private room, and I can get information. Knowledge is not information because knowledge has this accompanied characteristic to it, and that is joy. And Jesus makes this point. He says, but blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear. You see, the disciples are going to have joy because they have blessed eyes that actually see something. They see the truth of the kingdom, and they see the value of the kingdom, and they're seeing the glory of the kingdom, and they're seeing the kindness and compassion of the king. They're not just hearing information about all that. They know Him. They're able to see Him. They're able to enjoy that, and he says, and you're blessed and happy because you're going to have ears that hear, like actually hear the gospel. Not just hearing it, but like hearing it, like believing it, holding it, keeping it close to your heart, loving the gospel. Like that there's nothing more that you would rather know than Christ died for me, a sinner, and that that brings you joy. They'll hear it. They'll grow in their grasp of what the Lord is doing and has done, and that instead of dull hearts, they're going to have glad hearts. They're going to understand. They're going to understand the glory of Christ, the desirability of His kingdom, the power of the Holy Spirit, working in the heart and changing us and shaping us, the hope of glory and the resurrection and the need in all of that to confess our sins, to repent, and to be healed, to turn from idols to the living God, to turn away from any whatever stupid sins that we're kind of always plaguing us, to turn away from all that trash and to turn to Jesus. Always our eyes fixed on Him. Looking out, seeing what He's doing, glorying in what He's doing in the world.

All joy in life is found in knowing God and knowing the Father, knowing the Son, knowing the Holy Spirit, and looking out the window and seeing those same dependable ways that you can depend on, day after day, God's provision, the way He kind of takes care of you, and then sometimes the new things that come along our path. What a privilege it is to be a Christian, which of course, unsurprisingly, is what Jesus says at the end. It is, truly, I say to you, there are many prophets and righteous people who longed, long to see what you see. But they died before they could see it, and they longed to hear what you're listening to. But they didn't hear it. Oh, Jesus says that the prophets, all the righteous people, people that love the Lord, people like David himself, the Apostle Peter would say, even all of the angels in heaven, they longed to look long for the coming of the greater David who would shepherd his people. For the coming of the Christ, they longed to look at Jesus. He's saying everybody that ever came before you would want to be you. And there he is talking to them. And of course, through his spirit, by his word, he's been talking to us ever since.

Christian, do you realize how blessed you are? What a privilege to be a Christian. To hear and to understand and to rejoice in the great truths that we've been given about a kingdom and a king. To hear and to see and to know that in Christ, because of His work on the cross, your sins are forgiven, and that our lives have been opened up and that we will have ever-growing lives, we're going to become more or not less as we follow our king. Christian, you have a seat at the most glorious of windows watching God's truth unfold. You can sing of His greatness. You can bask in the sunlight of His love for you. You can rejoice in your king. What a privilege it is to be a Christian. Let's pray.

Father in heaven, what a privilege it is to belong to you. To be Christian, saved by your grace, growing in knowledge and love for you and others. Thank you for giving us a seat at the window that we can see your work in history and in our own hearts. That we can see the truthfulness of your word that our hearts can be made new. Give us glad hearts, O Lord. And may we delight in you now and forever. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen."

---

If you need any further assistance or adjustments, please let me know!