Good morning. You can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 11. There was a preacher named John. He was the one who baptized Jesus. He was Jesus' cousin, and he was a very close associate of Jesus. He was in jail. He had spoken truth to power. He had confronted the powerful King Herod, who ruled over Jerusalem and Judea and the surrounding regions with the support of the Roman Empire. He had confronted him because Herod was in an adulterous relationship with the king's sister-in-law. Eventually, John, for this action, would lose his life because he spoke up. And on this day, in the text that we're about to read, John is still in jail. So he's in jail for this action. And John's disciples, who had been listening to him preach and had participated in his baptizing activities, they're with him and providing for him, ministering to him while he's in jail. And there is word about Jesus and the excitement sort of swirling around now. John had been sent to sort of prepare the way for Jesus to come. And so he was also very glad to hear about this excitement that had been sort of swirling around. And as he sat there in jail, he wondered if Jesus was, in fact, the one, the Christ that God's people were looking for. And so he sends his disciples to ask Jesus that particular question. And our text today is Jesus' response to that. So hear the word of the Lord from Matthew 11, verses 2 through 6. 

Now when John heard in prison about the deeds of the Christ, he sent word by his disciples, and he said to him, "Are you the one who is to come, or shall we look for another?" And Jesus answered them, "Go and tell John what you hear and see. The blind receive their sight and the lame walk. The lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them. And blessed is the one who is not offended by me." This is the word of the Lord this morning. 

The latest tragic story the nation has been made aware of is, of course, a lot closer to home for us: the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge in Baltimore after it had been hit by a large container ship. If you spent any time seeking additional information about what happened, you would have come upon fairly quickly some video of the event itself, and then the audio of those who were keeping people off of the bridge once they knew that there was going to be a problem. If the event had occurred at a different time of the day, there would certainly have been people interviewed, people who had been standing outside nearby, or people who had been driving, and they would have wanted to know what happened. What was your take on it? People want to know how things go down, and so they seek information from those who are there, who are present. 

And so it was for John. He wanted eyewitness testimony. He wanted to know what was going down. And so he sends some of his disciples to Jesus. And when they arrive and they're there with Jesus, they are witnesses to some of the things that he's doing regularly because his fame had sort of spread. And Jesus reminds them in our text of some of the things that they have seen. He says, "You know that the blind people, they've received their sight, and you've seen that. And you've seen that the lame are now able to walk. And you've seen that there are those who were lepers and that they've been cleansed. And you've seen that there were deaf people that now are able to hear. And you've seen the dead raised. And you've heard that those who are poor have had good news preached to them. You've seen these things, and you've heard them." This is what John's disciples witnessed when they came to talk to Jesus. For Jesus says to them then, "Go and tell John what you hear and what you see. You don't have to make anything up. Just tell him what you hear and what you see."

These things which Jesus did during his life here, his ministry of teaching and healing among the people of Israel, was not all that was witnessed by the general public. As Jesus' fame spreads, he collects along with disciples and crowds a great number of enemies, including Herod himself. And eventually, he is crucified. His death on the cross, his brutal crucifixion at the hands of the Roman Empire, was witnessed. It was seen. It was heard. It was known. And talked about at that time as simply everybody knows that this is what happened.

One of Jesus' disciples named Peter, after Jesus rose from the dead, the resurrection, he preached this sermon to a large crowd that gathered in Jerusalem, and he said this: "Men of Israel, hear these words. Jesus of Nazareth, a man attested to you by God with mighty works and wonders and signs that God did through him in your midst, as you yourselves know, this Jesus delivered up according to the definite plan and foreknowledge of God, you crucified and killed by the hands of lawless men." Peter's talking to them. He says, "Look, these are facts. You know them. You saw it. You heard it. You participated in it. Jesus' death, his crucifixion."

After Jesus' resurrection, two disciples of his are walking away from Jerusalem, and Jesus actually comes up to them walking on the road as well and asks them what they're talking about. And they say this: "Are you the only visitor in Jerusalem that doesn't know the things that have happened there in these days concerning Jesus of Nazareth, a man who was a prophet, mighty in deed and word before God and all the people, and how our chief priests and rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death and crucified him? Are you the only person who doesn't know this here?" Basically, everyone knows. Everyone's heard about it. Everyone, so many have seen it. They're all witnesses of this. Jesus' death was witnessed.

Peter, in that sermon that he preaches after the resurrection, he also says this: "God raised him up, loosing the pangs of death because it wasn't possible for him to be held by it. This Jesus, God raised up, and of that we are all witnesses. We saw it. We heard it." The apostle Paul writes to the church in Corinth the following. He says, "I'm delivering to you as of first importance what I also received, that Christ died for our sins in accordance with the Scriptures, that he was buried, and that he was raised on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures, and that he appeared to Cephas, which is Peter, and then to the twelve, and then he appeared to more than 500 brothers at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have fallen asleep. And then he appeared to James, and then to all the apostles, and last of all, as to one untimely born, he appeared also to me." Five hundred at one time. Brothers saw Jesus after the resurrection. Witnesses saw, heard, touched these facts, witnessed by many people the life, the death, the resurrection of Christ, the foundation of the Christian faith, or as Paul says, of first importance.

John, a different John, not the same as the one who was in prison, John, one of Jesus' disciples, wrote a letter which he begins like this: "That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, and which we have seen with our own eyes, and which we have looked upon and have touched with our own hands concerning the word of life, the life was made manifest, we have seen it, we testify to it, we proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the Father, and was made manifest to us. That which we have seen and heard, we proclaim also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us. Indeed, our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son, Jesus Christ. We're writing these things so that our joy may be complete." John's writing, and he's saying, you know, everything. He's writing to people, and he's saying, "Do you understand? Like, we saw with our eyes, we heard, we touched the prince in the hand." All of this, John's saying, "I want to share with you because I want you to know Jesus." Every Christian witness wants the joy of seeing others come to Christ, of becoming a part of Christ's church. And that's because we've seen as Christian people that there is life, as John says, in Christ, and there is life nowhere else. Built on the foundation of the apostles and their witness to the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus is the witness that we ourselves give to the world. And what we're saying is what we have seen and heard of God's work in the lives of his people, what we see and hear about lives saved by God's grace from the penalty of sin, what we have seen and heard and know about answered prayer, about changed lives, about healed hearts, about healed bodies. We are witnesses of the Lord's continuing work in the world. And we want people to follow Jesus. Because we've seen, and we've heard, and we've experienced, and we know the joy of being Christians.

So there were witnesses. There were just witnesses, witnesses to every aspect of Jesus' life. Those who saw and heard, witnesses to his life and ministry, witnesses to his suffering and death, witnesses to the empty tomb, witnesses to Jesus himself risen from the dead. But what does that all mean? I mean, they saw it, they heard it, but what does it mean? Because that's, of course, where that story with the bridge, that's where that went next, right? First you find out, well, what happened? But then the next questions that immediately come out, well

, what's the impact of all that going to be? What's the impact on the poor? What's the impact on the workers? What's the impact on the nation's economy? What's the impact of it all? What does it mean for us as a nation or as a city? And so it was for John. He was wondering, what does it all mean? What does it mean, these things that I'm hearing that Jesus is doing? What does it mean? And he asks a question, and in seeking the answer to the question, he proposes an answer. He says this: he sent word by his disciples, and he said to Jesus, "Are you the one who is to come, or shall we look for another? Are you the one who is to come, or shall we look for another?" You see, there was an anticipation that John had. There was an anticipation that the people in Jesus' day had. Here was the anticipation. The one that John is referring to is the Messiah or the Christ, which the Jewish people of John's day were looking forward to, and this is what he was to be like. We know some things about what they anticipated because of some words that were spoken by some different people. For example, when Jesus is born, the standard process was this sort of dedication at the temple. This man Simeon comes up, and he holds this baby in his arms, and he says some things. Because the Lord has given him insight of who Jesus is, he says, we see, he goes this, "My eyes," Simeon says, "My eyes have seen, O Lord, your salvation, that you have prepared in the presence of all peoples a light for revelation to the Gentiles and for glory to your people Israel." He says, "I am holding this person, the Christ, the one who is supposed to bring salvation to people, who is supposed to be a light in a dark world, who is for all people. He's just not restricted to a Jewish, it's not like a Jewish sub-sect, but Jesus was to be for all people and for glory, for glory for God and glory for all those who belong to him." Simeon is holding Jesus, and he's saying, that's what the Christ is supposed to be like. That's the one. Mary, when the angel appears to her initially, makes very clear to her this child that she was going to bear was going to be a great king and a ruler, and of his reign there would be no end. That's the impact. Jesus, if he is the Christ, if he's the one, he's to be the great king, the ruler. His reign would be no end. There would be salvation for all people, a light, glory. The prophet Isaiah, hundreds of years before the coming of Jesus, had given the people this picture, this framework for their thinking about a coming Messiah when they said this. When Isaiah said this, he said that he would be their shepherd, that he would suffer, that he would be God with us and, at the same time, the servant of God and that God's spirit would rest on him, and that he would bring justice and victory, and in his name the Gentiles would hope, hope would come into the world when the Christ would come. Is this the one? John asks, is Jesus the one? Is this the king? Is this the one who would win victory? Is this the one who would bring hope into the world? Is this the one who would bring salvation? That's what he wants to know. Is Jesus the one?

Circumstances may have confused John as they have so many other people. Why is John languishing in prison if Jesus is the one? Wouldn't the one, the Christ, who was coming for salvation, I mean, wouldn't he be doing something about the guards and about Herod and all the bad guys? A Christ on the cross, Christ's grander vision of defeating sin, death, hell, all of that, that probably wasn't in John's framework. Circumstances seem to have suggested that Jesus wasn't the one. That's why he had to ask the question, because of the circumstances. Circumstances may make people ask the same sort of questions today. It's all fine and good that we talk about Jesus rising again and that he makes glorious promises to people, but what about this? What about this trouble? What about X, Y, or Z that's happening in my life? If God cared about me, if Jesus was the one, why doesn't he make this happen? That would make my life easier or better. If Jesus is the one, the King, the Christ, why is there evil in the world? Why did he let this tragedy happen? Why am I so depressed? Why am I struggling in this or that way? But circumstances don't define the truth. Circumstances are just circumstances. That's what they are. And disciples in Jesus' day and Christians ever since have all drawn the same conclusion, that Jesus is the one and that there is no other. Jesus himself says it. He says it like this: "I am the way. I am the truth, and I am the life. No one comes to the Father except through me." Jesus is the one. There is no way of salvation, no way of forgiveness of sin without him. In him, there is the way of salvation, forgiveness of sin, true healing, true help, true joy, eternal life, all by placing your faith in him. That's what Jesus says. That's what all those things that everybody witnessed, that's the impact. That's what they mean. They mean that Jesus is the one. He was demonstrating by his life, death, and resurrection that he is able to bring all of these things into the world: the hope, salvation, glory, and for you, life. And he calls everybody today to repentance and faith and a life of following after him, knowing that he is with us in all the circumstances, whatever your circumstances are. The Lord is with you. Everything that the people of his day saw and heard pointed to this truth: that Jesus was the one. No more looking was required, because he asked that, right? Should we look for another? No. You don't need to. Look what's happening. But everyone still had a decision to make. I mean, the final discussion that surrounded the bridge that I was aware of was always the local one. It was, how am I going to get from point A to point B? And that was more or less of a discussion based on where you worked and how important that bridge was. Some who might commute down to the lower end of Baltimore are wondering, is the traffic going to be more in the tunnels now because of this? Like, what's the impact of it all going to be that way? For me personally, will I need to leave a little bit earlier? You know, if you live close to Baltimore and travel all the time and commute to work, you have to think about that more. It becomes more important because it impacts you. And what is happening in Jesus' life, ministry, death, resurrection is something which impacts all of you. All of us. It's something that must be considered. You can't just walk away from it. It's of central importance, of first importance. One's eternal state is at stake, and the decision is before us. And Jesus says as much. He tells them everything that, you know, is interesting. He tells John's disciples, like, "You've witnessed all this. You've seen all of this," right? And he doesn't just say, "So tell John all is good. Everything's fine. You know, I've got it," right? "I'm the Christ." Instead, he ends his kind of commentary to the disciples with the following statement: "And blessed is the one who is not offended by me." That's how Jesus ends his interaction with John's disciples. Jesus is well aware that many would take offense. That he would be hated even by those who should have worshipped him. Christianity is offensive. Jesus is offensive. The things he says are offensive if he's not your king. Because what Jesus is declaring by saying that he is the one is that you owe him your life. That's what he's saying. Now, if I said that to you, right, you'd all start leaving, and that would be good. It would be incredibly offensive. How dare you say that to me? I wish I had a British accent. Jesus declares that he is the king, and so he calls each of us to some things. He says that we've got to follow him versus following our own desires. That's offensive. I mean, if he's not the king, he's calling you to not just do whatever you want. He's saying, you must do what I want. He calls each person to repent of their sin and to even, here's the harder one, repent of their sin and even to willingly receive the consequences that you might have for that sin versus following your own heart and then spending your whole life trying to escape the consequences of things that you do through blaming other people and downplaying the seriousness of your sin and trying to rationalize it away. He says, no, no, no, no. We're all sinners, and you need to repent of your sin. You've got to turn away from everything that would keep you away from me because you've got to follow me. Because I'm the Christ. That's what Jesus is saying. And so he's calling us to maybe the hardest thing of all. He's saying, you must give away your pride. And that sense of, like, that I am in charge, and you've got to humble yourself. You've got to humble yourself. That's offensive to people. It's always been offensive to people. It's offensive to people today. Go anywhere and just tell people that they have to follow Jesus. Jesus calls us to follow him with our whole heart, mind, soul, and strength. That is way more than just acknowledging that he exists. And it's way more than even acknowledging that these things are true.

 You know, we believe he maybe did these things. And it's way more than thinking that he's a good teacher, like my high school calculus teacher. And it's way more than just trying to be good. Jesus says that we must follow him. And to be offended by him, to refuse his call over your life, is to reject him. It's to walk away from him. It's to shake your fist at him. And to say, I'm doing it my way. To reject him, though the Bible's testimony is, is ultimately to face him as your judge. And to receive the judgment that we deserve for our sins versus receiving the free gift that he gives out of life. For all who would come to him. Being offended by Jesus ultimately leads to death. To hell. To being cast away from the presence of the God that you want nothing to do with for all eternity. That's why Jesus says, "Blessed is the one who is not offended by me." Because to be offended by him is to reject him. And to face him as your judge. Now of course Jesus says, "Blessed is the one who is not offended by me." Because if you're not offended by Jesus, he says, you're blessed. Why are you blessed? Because the one who all these witnesses were able to say did this, this, this in his life, in his death, in his resurrection, and all that that meant, the impact of that, that he is the Christ. With that comes the blessing of belonging to him. If you're not offended by him, if you're embracing him, you receive all the blessing of having him as your king willingly receive because he won't force you. And what are the blessings? Well, the blessings are forgiveness of sin. And the blessings are a new heart. And the blessings are life itself. And the blessings are, he says, you become children of God. You can speak to him as your father and know that he hears you because he is. Adoption as sons and daughters. We become more like Christ. We become more holy, Christ-like. We have Christ always interceding for us, caring for us, always present with us. We have the knowledge that flows from knowing God. We know God. We're reconciled to God. We have peace with God. We have the joy of believing. We have hope in this life. We have all of the blessings that come from knowing Christ and not being offended by him. Because you know what? The person who is not offended by Jesus is going to be a repentant person. I want to repent of my sin. Why? Because Jesus died on the cross for my sin. I want to get it all out. I want to be done with it forever. I'm going to repent. I'm going to humble myself because I want to serve this king who would die for me. That's the gospel. That Christ died for sinners like us. Oh, we'll want to repent of our sin, believe that Jesus died for our sins on the cross, that he's given all who trust in him. It's eternal life, eternal life that was guaranteed by his own resurrection. Because if Christ is risen from the dead, then every one of us who is not offended by Jesus, but who embraces him by faith, we too will rise from the dead. Death will have lost its sting. You will live forever. That's the promise of the gospel in Christ. To not be offended by Jesus then means that we will not face him as our judge, but we will bow before him with joy as our king. One day we too will rise from the dead. The circumstances that may cause us so great of concern now, great pain in this life, they fade into the background. And they're replaced with the every moment blessing of being with Jesus, being with his people who are not offended by him. So what are you going to do? Will you humble yourself before the king? Will you humble yourself before the one who lived a life of holiness and compassion and peace, only to be crucified that he might bear our sin on his shoulders, and then who was raised from the dead, and who now rules and reigns from his heavenly throne, and calls all men and women and children to follow him? What do you do? Or will you remain outside of the kingdom? What will you do? May we never be offended by this king, but may we receive this king as our own, knowing that in Jesus and in him alone is real hope, forgiveness of sin, eternal life, abundant joy, and peace. Let's pray. And blessing, real blessing, now and forever. Amen. 

Let's pray. Father in heaven, we are so glad that there is forgiveness of sin and eternal life in Christ. Encourage us with the witness of scripture and the testimony of other Christians. Help us to share the faith we've been given by your grace with others. And may we never be offended by you, O Lord. May we serve you gladly all of our days until we too will be raised and will be in your presence forever. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray these things. Amen.