"Well, you can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 8. We're going to look at verses 18 through 22 together. If you're visiting with us this morning, we've been doing this. We've been walking through the Gospel of Matthew. The Gospel of Matthew tells us the story of Jesus. And the first part of that Gospel gives us a background, sets us up to hear about Jesus' ministry. It tells us, reminds us, that Jesus was in the line of David the king. It talks about his miraculous birth. It talks about his baptism by his cousin John, his connection to his Father in Heaven, his being tempted by the devil. And we took a closer look at what the ministry of Jesus entailed. Then and now, we saw that he preached, and he taught and proclaimed a message of repentance because the kingdom of God was near, because the king was there. And he fleshed that out for us in what's known as the Sermon on the Mount, a series of teachings that Jesus gave to his disciples and to the crowds that would come to hear him speak.

Last week, we began looking at a new section in the Gospel of Matthew. Jesus comes down from preaching the Sermon on the Mount and he encounters people, people in all kinds of distress. Matthew records some of the interactions Jesus has with people. He moves from his teaching and proclamation ministry to the ministry of healing. And so last week, we considered Jesus' encounter with three people, with a leper whom he healed, with a centurion who had the faith to believe that Jesus could heal his servant, and then a brief interaction with the Apostle Peter's mother-in-law, where Jesus simply touches her and she is healed of a fever.

Jesus' healing ministry, just like his teaching ministry, always drew huge crowds because if you can touch somebody or talk and their disease goes away, people come to you. That would be the five-star doctor in our community. And so the crowds just would gather around Jesus. And as they begin to grow, Jesus decides to head away from the town where all the people are coming and to travel across the sea or the lake of Galilee to the other side, to a Gentile area, an area that was simply not Jewish in orientation. And there, later on in the Gospel, we'll see there is where there was a lot of pig herding that went on and there's an interaction there. But as they're preparing to go across the lake, two men approached Jesus, and this is where we're going to read today. It's Matthew 8, verse 18 through 22. Hear the word of the Lord.

Now when Jesus saw a crowd around him, he gave orders to go over to the other side. And a scribe came up and said to him, "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go." And Jesus said to him, "Foxes have holes and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head." And another of the disciples came to him, "Lord, let me first go and bury my father." And Jesus said to him, "Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead." This is the word of the Lord this morning.

Who do you follow? Whose ideas, thoughts, perspectives do you connect with? A person might say that he or she is just, they just follow their own heart, their own perspective. Not infrequently, Christians will follow a charismatic leader only to find out that the leader has been living some sort of double life. People are followers. That's what we are. By our nature, we're made actually that way. The Bible describes us as sheep, not the most glowing description one could have, but part of that is because we are meant to follow. We are created, I would suggest, to follow a king. We were created to follow Jesus and in doing that, to follow after God.

There is this scribe, a teacher of the law, who comes to Jesus, and he is beginning to see that Jesus might really be worth following. And a scribe came up, the Bible says, and said to him, "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go." You see, there are a lot of good reasons to follow Jesus. I kind of got started, and then I sort of broke it down here a little bit for you, but the scribe, you'll note, addresses him as teacher. That makes a lot of sense because that's what a scribe was. A scribe was a teacher. So he's going to Jesus as like a greater teacher. He has listened to Jesus, and he hears that there's a great reason to follow Jesus. Jesus, it looks like he's somebody who speaks the truth. And Jesus, when he speaks, he speaks with an authority that clearly comes from God. And the words that are coming out of his mouth are words of wisdom. And whenever he interacts with an individual or with people, it seems like he kind of knows exactly what they're like. Like he says things that are sort of probing. He asks them questions that sort of disrupt them. So it seems like he knows his audience always. And he preaches, not because it's his job or something, there's never a sense of that, but there's always this sense of he's preaching with great zeal. He wants people to hear what it is that he's saying. And when he speaks, he speaks with power, with real power, so that people are gathering to listen to this man speak. And he'll turn this kind of grand, powerful, zealous, with a kindness that's demonstrable. When he speaks to some people, it becomes very clear just how kind this person is by the things that he says. And he never is satisfied with where people are. He's always calling them to something more. And his message that he speaks as a teacher is always this message of hope. He's talking about a kingdom, a kingdom of God, not a world that's just sort of like under the oppression of the Roman Empire and all that kind of business. But he's talking about something great, something beyond just surviving today. He's presenting a hope, and then all of this is done with just a seriousness of purpose. It's as if Jesus has come to do something. He's purposeful and serious. The scribe calls him teacher. He says, "I want to follow someone who's like that." He must have really liked what he was hearing. Because he said to Jesus, he says right here, "I will follow you wherever you go. I want to keep hearing him."

Of course, the teacher had said some things about himself and says things about himself that are just like remarkable. It's a good reason to follow Jesus, great reasons. Because Jesus has said that he is the bread of life, that life comes from feeding on him and on his words. He says, "I am the bread of life." It's Jesus who said this, "I am the light of the world." It's a good reason to follow Jesus. If he is the light of all of the world, do we live in a dark world? Do we live in a place where there's trouble all the time? Jesus says, "I am the light of the world." He says then too, that "I am the gate. I am the only way that you can know God. There is one way to know God and it's me." Those are Jesus' words. It's a good reason to follow Jesus because if you want to know God, that's the only way to get there. He says it another way when he says, "I am the way, I am the truth, I am the life. No one comes to the Father except through me." And then Jesus says, "And I'm the good shepherd. I'm not a bad shepherd. I'm like a good shepherd. I take care of my sheep. I love my sheep. I call them by name. I want their best. I lead them beside the still waters to eat good food." And he says, "I am the true vine, and you're the branches. You're the ones who are connected to me. Don't you want to be connected to me? In me there is strength in life." And he also claimed, this is what he claimed, he said, "I am the resurrection and the life. If you follow me, you will never die." Jesus said these things. And he also claimed that at the end of all time and when we die, we will face him, and he will be the judge. He'll separate people out based on whether they're followers of him or not. There are great reasons to follow Jesus. If the words of Jesus are true, then what he's saying is, you must follow me. If you want to live forever, that's the only way to get there. And then we find out that the thing that sort of, you know, naturally we know about ourselves that we're not that great. That like Jesus has the power to forgive sins. He forgives sins. And his relationship with the Father is like the day he says at one point, he says, you know, "I and the Father are one." There's this connection between the Son and the Father that's glorious. And the teacher says all these things. And so the scribe, he's hearing this message and seeing this person and seeing what he's doing and these healings. And he says, "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go." Oh, the teacher also says, there's great reasons to follow Jesus because Jesus promises that for all those who are in him, who belong to him, that he gives them his spirit. He pours out his Holy Spirit on his people so that in that way, Jesus is with us always, always, all the time. You will never be alone. He says, you know, "You will never be alone. In Christ, he is always with you." And then he also pours out gifts on his people. He allows us to bear fruit and he gives us purpose in life and all those

 different things. This is all following Jesus. There's great reasons to follow Jesus. The scribe, he says that right here, "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go."

You know, people decide and make decisions for Jesus today all the time. All the time. And so, based on many of these same things, in him, they see help in their troubles. They have troubles and they see Jesus as help. A better way of life, a fresh start. I was this scribe personally. I was this guy. I know this person because it's me. I grew up in a home that was Christian. We went to church like many of the young people in this congregation. The parents took me to church. I heard about Jesus from a very early age. And I remember, you know, just kind of wandering around, not really knowing how much I believed, having my doubts, doing all this. And I remember one night in high school at a camp kind of place saying, "Okay, I'm done. My project of personal exploration of what's true or not. What I want," I said, "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go." You see, I'm this scribe. I understand that sentiment. Okay, I'm convinced. You're who you say you are. I will follow you wherever you go. You know, what pleasure a person might have hearing those words, huh? Like, think about it for yourself. You know, your child comes up to you, "Dad, I will follow you wherever you go." Think about it. You're a leader in a business environment. You have employees. And, you know, you're trying to accomplish something. And they look at you and they admire you so much for who you are and your leadership capabilities and your integrity and your knowledge of a particular subject area. And they come up to you and they say, "I will follow you wherever you take me, wherever you go." Now, who wouldn't be pleased by that?

And so we see Jesus saying, "Thank you. Thank you so much. Hop in the boat." Except that's not what he says. That's not what we get. And that's because making a decision to follow Jesus, "I will follow you wherever you go," isn't too hard. People make that decision all the time. But if we had access to statistics on how many of those commitments stuck, well, I imagine that might be disheartening. Because deciding to follow Jesus and following Jesus aren't the same thing. People periodically join Planet Fitness. I put myself in that. It's a periodic joining. You know, some of you I can tell by the smiles. You know what I mean. You have all the best intentions. You really do. And the great thing is Planet Fitness never judges. It's a no-judgment zone. And so you come when you're able and when you are inspired to try to get things together. And I think that's sometimes how we see commitment. But Jesus' response to describe and then to the second man who comes hardly have a Planet Fitness feel about them. "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go." And Jesus said to him, "Foxes have holes and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head." Why that response? Well, I mean, we know that Jesus is perceptive of people's hearts. He can see sort of inside, right? And that gives him an advantage. Could it be that the scribe's attitude led Jesus to make this comment? I mean, is it possible that the scribe had the attitude, "Boy, it's your lucky day. Because I have decided to follow you. I've taken some notice of some of the thoughts you've said and believe you have some great thoughts. I'm going to follow you wherever you go." Is it possible? Possible that Jesus sort of sees that, like that his attitude is, "Jesus, you should be more thankful for this." Or maybe it is all heartfelt and so Jesus looks and sees that the man really means it, but he wants him to understand what he's getting into. He wants him to understand it better. Jesus' response here is neither an invitation to follow or a rejection. It's neither one. It's simply a statement, a straightforward comment that just cuts right to it. And that is this, that there's nowhere to lay his head. There's no rest. Not yet. Just a brief aside, Jesus identifies himself here. He says, "Foxes have holes and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head." That expression, the Son of Man, he calls himself that. That just has twofold, there's twofold aspect to that. The first comes from the Old Testament and the prophecy of Daniel. And Daniel has this sort of vision of a future Messiah. So it's a Messiah picture. The text says this in Daniel. It says, "I saw in the night visions, behold, with the clouds of heaven there came one like a son of man. And he came to the ancient of days and was presented before him. And to him was given dominion and glory and a kingdom that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve him. And his dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not pass away. And his kingdom is one that shall not be destroyed." So the first thing, when Jesus says, "I'm the Son of Man," he's identifying himself with this Daniel picture, which is a picture of the Messiah, of the Christ, of the King, eternal kingdom. But the other thing he's doing by identifying himself as Son of Man is he's identifying with us, with our human nature. I am a man. He is the suffering servant. He is frail like us. So the Son of Man has come into this world and here is the state of things he's saying to this scribe. Here's the state of things. You can look around and you can see that birds have places where they go to, nests, and foxes have holes, dens that they live in. But not me. Now Jesus was, you know, they have their places of security and rest right here. Now Jesus was just in a home. He was in Simon Peter's home and presumably he rested there. But his ministry, he's saying, would just simply not be tied to this world. And neither can be the ministry of his disciples. They cannot be tied to this world. Being a Christian, following Jesus, will not be one joyful listening to a great talk after another. Being a Christian, following Jesus, will be uncomfortable. At times it will be taxing and exhausting. It will often not be fun. Following him will mean you may need to go where you don't want to go. Following him may mean that you will want rest from something and you will find that the troubles and the struggles just keep coming. So what did the scribe do? This is what I love about the Bible. No idea. We have no idea. We don't know because Matthew is not writing to give a scribe history. He's writing for you, for me. What are we going to do? That's the question that's being asked. The scribe's response to Jesus' comment is not recorded. We're left to wonder. How did he respond? Did he follow him? We don't know. But what we do know is at this point in the narrative, another man, a disciple, comes up to him. And he's also going to be a follower and has been following him. But he has a very honest request, and this is it. It says, "Another of the disciples said to him, 'Lord, I'm ready to go across the lake with you. Great. Glad to do that. Let me bury my father first.' Now, burial in those days would have occurred within hours of death. And so it's unlikely that this man would be there with Jesus talking to him if his father had just died. He wouldn't be there. More likely is that the father is dying. And in some ways, that doesn't make what Jesus says any more shocking. Though it may seem less mean or something. Well, at least his father isn't dead, and he's saying this to him. He's just dying, and he's saying this to him. Some people find some help in that. I don't. Jesus is calling this man away from what would have been seen as a central social obligation at the time. To bury your father. I mean, come on. Now, Jesus may be saying that he's bringing in something new. He's bringing in life and the dead. He's saying that he's going to be burying their own dead. And the idea that you can always remain dead in your sins and do what everyone does, to do the life that society finds acceptable, the dead burying their own dead, that's not hard. Maybe he's talking in sort of language like that. Maybe he's even exaggerating for effect. He does this later on when he tells us that we have to hate our father and our mother. He's calling you to act that way toward your father and mother. No, but he's making a point. So maybe Jesus is exaggerating here for effect, for a point. Here's what we do know. The statement Jesus makes is meant to be shocking. Because it is shocking. There's nothing easy about it. Jesus said to him, "Follow me and leave the dead to bury their own dead" when the man asked if he could go and bury his father first. The commitment that Jesus is calling this man to is absolutely radical. Jesus must be number one. He must be greater than the closest relationship that you have. The relationship that we have with Christ must be the greatest relationship that we have. Jesus is calling the disciple here to renounce all other allegiances. The Bible talks about this in other places. This need for total commitment explains why the Scripture speaks sometimes about Christians knowingly marrying non-Christians. That it will be ill-advised. It will be difficult because your commitment will be torn. Because Christ

 calls you to himself. Same is true of Christians going into business with non-Christians. There will be decisions made that will press against who is your fundamental allegiance. There's no sitting on the fence. One foot dangling into the pastures of the world and its ways and the other foot dangling into the life with Jesus. It's all or nothing. It's life or death. It's resurrection and a kingdom or the dead burying their own dead. Jesus says that. Following Jesus is not a planet fitness following. It is a total commitment and in some ways it's not even a choice. Jesus is not waiting anxiously to see what you will do if we will follow him. In fact, with the second man what we see is that it is an authoritative call. It's a call that is either to be obeyed or not. No one is outside of that call. No one is outside of that call then. No one is outside of that call now. We are left not knowing once again how this disciple responds. We just have the call of Jesus. Follow me. And so it is today. Jesus is calling you today. Follow me. The call to follow Jesus. There are some words about following. Following of course means that you're leaving something. Leaving something behind. You're going somewhere. The scripture calls you to leave behind your sin. The scripture calls us to leave behind our allegiances to the world and its ways. To follow Jesus. Follow me. Following means also that you are not the leader. That may be the hardest part. Following requires a heart of humility. That Jesus is the leader and I am not. Following requires a heart of love that we admire our leader. Following requires a heart of faithfulness so we're going to stick close to him. Following requires the act of obedience. We're going to do the things that he says. Following means you're not the leader. But following Jesus also means that you would see his work firsthand because you're with him. So you would see the things that Jesus does. And following Jesus also means that you would have the blessing of his friendship, his companionship, his love for you. And following Jesus would, as every Christian ultimately, you know, you will hear them say as they get older and have lived a life of faith. So following Jesus means that you will know that you have been following the right man.

I think that there were probably many days where the disciples probably enjoyed being disciples. You know, these are like harsh sayings but like think about it. Like they saw Jesus do incredible things and they were just there with him. Right? Like, I mean, imagine the feeding of the 5,000 and all the bread. And Jesus gave them the opportunity to go and be the distributors of the bread. Right? Like, I mean, you'd almost be laughing by the end. I would think. I don't know. It would make you so happy. Right? Like you get to be a part of this incredible thing. You can't imagine the, you know, all these people who are hungry are all of a sudden getting all these bread and fish and the disciples are very somber. And passing the plate down the aisle. I'd like to know. They would be like super excited. I bet there were many days where the disciples really thoroughly enjoyed where they had to go with Jesus. Who wouldn't want to see him? Tell a blind man that he could see. Who wouldn't want to see Jesus? Take a man who could never walk, hold him by the hand, lift him up and watch him praise God. Who wouldn't want to be there for that? Many days, oh, I imagine the disciples would have enjoyed being disciples. But you see, following also means that you've got to always go where Jesus goes. And following means the cross. Following means that you're out of control. That you have to go forward sometimes, not really understanding what Jesus is doing in your life. Following means that you're going to see yourself. Because if you're walking with the person who is perfect and holy, you can't see yourself in any other way but as a sinner. Saved by grace, but a sinner.

Today, Jesus is saying, follow me. Give up being the leader. Totally commit. No other allegiances. If you follow the king, you will have grief in this world. You will have grief over all of your sins, the sins of others in the fallenness of this world. You will have grief, but you will have forgiveness. You'll have forgiveness to receive and forgiveness to give. If you follow this king, you will have troubles in this world because he has no place to lay his head. But you will know what it means to have God with you. And you will have the joy of knowing the king. And you will know that you have purpose even in these troubles that you experience. Follow this king and you will have no rest. That's my promise to you today. Follow this king and you will have no rest. You will have war. You will be battling against the world, the flesh, and the devil every day until you die. You will have work to do. But then you will have resurrection. And then you will have eternal rest. And then you will have life forever. Jesus is calling you today. Follow me. What will you do? Will you follow him? Let's pray.

Lord, we are so grateful for the gift of your son, who has made a relationship with you possible through his death on the cross. Help us to see our sin and our need for salvation. Help us to see Jesus for the great and glorious king that he is. And help us to follow him all of our days until we stand in glory and see him face to face. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray these things. Amen."