Well, good morning.

You can turn with me this morning to Matthew, chapter 22. We're working our way through the Gospel of Matthew. It is the story of Jesus, his works and his words. That first two thirds that we've been through together have described for us his ministry around the Sea of Galilee, his teaching and healing and miracles that he would perform over the course of three years or so. And Jesus is there, he's doing these wonderful things. His disciples are learning what it means to have faith. He's teaching them about the kingdom and what kind of king he was going to be. And all of that has been going on. And now it comes to this culmination, a real shift, actually, even in tone, as the book heads to the final third, which is largely an account of the last week of Jesus' ministry and life. As he's in Jerusalem, heading towards the cross. He's come into the city, he comes in with a triumphal entry. He's traveled there with all these folks from his region of the country, family members, disciples and their families and others from Galilee. And news of his coming, because of the rumors about what kind of guy this is, news of his coming has sort of spread around the city to some level. The city's packed, the roads are packed, the temple area is crowded. Those who were powerful were there, they wanted to be seen. The chief priests and the Sadducees, the Pharisees, the Roman officials, and they were watching. It's a time of concern when you have all of these folks who are under your hands, under your foot. They're all gathering together in one place. There's a concern and they're watching. Opposition to Jesus becomes more pronounced. The religious establishment, the political establishment, everybody's kind of on alert. And Jesus' first act doesn't make them less on alert. He goes in and he riles up the temple, throwing out the money changers and those who are selling animals just to demonstrate his authority as the king. And then he returns the next day to the temple and he tells these three parables that we looked at last week that paint the religious leadership in this incredibly negative light and emphasize the inclusion of those of lower status into his kingdom. And the religious leaders' response to this was one of great anger. And so they plan to try to get him to incriminate himself so that they're going to ask him some questions, some trick questions. And the first one we're going to look at today, this is Matthew, chapter 22, verses 15 to 22. So hear the word of the Lord.

Then the Pharisees went and plotted how to entangle him in his words. And they sent their disciples to him along with the Herodians, saying, "Teacher, we know that you are true and that you teach the way of God truthfully. And you do not care about anyone's opinion, for you are not swayed by appearances. Tell us then, what you think. Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar or not?" But Jesus, aware of their malice, said, "Why put me to the test, you hypocrites? Show me the coin for the tax." And they brought him a denarius. And Jesus said to them, "Whose likeness and inscription is this?" And they said, "Caesar's." Then he said to them, "Therefore render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's." And when they heard it, they marveled. And they left him and they went away.

This is the word of the Lord.

When I was little, I had a neighborhood friend. He was kind of trouble, but his name was Tom. Tommy. And we would go up after school over to Tommy's house and play around. And behind his house there was owner of a large field. And he had put up some electric fencing to presumably keep some of his animals in, or maybe Tom out. And I don't know anything. I didn't really. Very young, I didn't really know anything about fences except that that one looked a lot different than the ones I knew. You know, the board fences and everything. Now, Tom, he knew, and so he challenged me to grab it. And I'm sure he saw my hesitation. And so he encouraged me with a question. Spoken or implied? "You're not afraid, are you?" Now, my little boy mind felt utterly trapped by that question. Because if I said, "Well, yes," well, like what boy who wanted to become a man would say that? But if I said no, then he would ask, of course, then why don't you just grab a hold of it? I was trapped. I learned something that day. That electricity hurts. 

Jesus is in a situation where the religious leaders are upset and they're going to try to trap him. They come to him with a question. The question is, "Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar or not?" Who's asking this question? Well, there's two groups of people that are mentioned here. The first are the Pharisees' disciples, not the Pharisees themselves. This would be people like maybe Saul, later Paul. Someone who held the coats of those who would stone the disciple Stephen several years later. These would be younger trainees for ministry. It would be the Matthew and the Philip and the Adam. The interns, pastoral interns and trainees for ministry, for the work of teaching the law to the people. And they were looking to please their teachers, their instructors. And so they were sent to Jesus. That was one of the groups, the Pharisees' disciples, sort of some younger Pharisee trainees. And then the other group was a group called the Herodians. We don't know a lot about them, but the name tells us everything we need to know. They were loyalists to King Herod, who we know is not a great character. They were not actually friends with the Pharisees. Pharisees were generally seen as kind of the people's people, common man's religious leader. But the Herodians, Jesus was. They had a common enemy in Jesus. And so here we see them plotting and working together. The Herodians generally would work with the Romans and try to carve out a way to sort of peacefully coexist with them and keep the Herodian dynasty, all those King Herods intact. So they were sort of loyal to King Herod first and were seen as pro-Roman. So you had the Pharisees and these Herodians and they gather together and they're going to try to entrap Jesus.

The description given to their character here, there are two words that are used to describe them. The first you can find in verse 18, and it says that Jesus was aware of their malice, that they were malicious men. They had a wicked desire. And the wicked desire was to trap Jesus, to either discredit him with respect to the crowd that was around, or to portray him as either an insurrectionist or a Roman sympathizer, one or the other. There was no interest at all in hearing what he had to say as king as the Christ. They had already judged him to be an imposter. They were trying to get rid of him. And so they were malicious. And the first thing that we notice about malice is that it is crafty. Malice is a craft that often comes in the form of trick questions. The first expression of malice in the Bible comes this way as a question Satan asks Eve, "Did God actually say, you shall not eat of any tree in the garden?" A question full of malice. And that's the way that that often works. The malicious men are simply doing what Satan, the greatest enemy of Jesus and all of us did. It was Martin Luther who reminded us that Satan's craft and power are great. And armed with cruel hate on earth is not his equal. Malice is crafty, his craft and power are great. So malice is that way. But malice is also premeditated. We see this evidence by the setup of the incident. It says that the Pharisees went and they plotted how to entangle him in his words. So these were not off the cuff questions they had thought through. What are the best questions to trick Jesus, their hatred for him in this way. Malice is very different than just flying off the handle, being angry or rageful. Malice is a premeditated desire to harm someone else. So they come with this craft and they come with their premeditated hatred. And then malice is often accompanied too by flattery. Anyone who watches any politics stuff, and certainly the way in which now anybody's interviewed to be a part of a cabinet position, you can see this all in action, lovely action before the killing question blow is struck, the flattery begins about how thankful they are for whoever this person is that they're looking at. And this is exactly what they're doing here. It's a practice in politics. Malice is often accompanied by flattery. We see it in their words. "Teacher, we know that you are true and that you, I mean, his own disciples don't talk to him this way. Teacher, we know that you are true and that you teach the way truthfully and you don't care about anyone's opinion and that no one, you're not swayed by appearances." Now, of course, all of those statements are true about Jesus, aren't they? He always speaks the truth. He's not swayed by anybody's appearances. He doesn't particularly care what other people say. But they're not saying that because they're acknowledging those facts. They're saying it to try to flatter him. They speak with these words of malice just dripping from their tongues, flattering Jesus in an effort to catch him off guard. And so these are malicious men. There's another word that is used to describe them, Jesus. It says, Jesus, aware of their malice. Verse 18 again said, "Why put me to the test, you hypocrites?" And so not only are this group of men malicious, but they're also identified by Jesus as hypocrites. Understand, both sets of men who come to Jesus publicly would have been seen as very dignified men. They had the appearance of dignity. They had the approach of those who were respected by the crowds around them. As teachers. They had the appearance of honesty and integrity and interest. But their hearts were full of lies and deceit and malice. To remind us of that, we looked at a couple of weeks ago the fig tree that Jesus curses outside the city on the way in. Why does he curse it? Because it looked fruitful. The leaves looked like they had some hope, but the tree itself had no fruit, and there was no good fruit in them. They looked fruitful, but there was no good fruit in them. They were hypocrites, malicious hypocrites.

This is, of course, a lesson for us. The Christian is one who ought never to be either malicious or a hypocrite. And the Christian is a person who's very careful to guard against both of those things. Our lives should match our words as we seek to use our talents and gifts for the good of others and the glory of God. We ought to be a people who are premeditated in terms of a people of premeditated compassion and kindness towards others and forgiveness. We ought to be a people of truthful speech and whose hearts are filled with joy even when we're called to suffer for the sake of the Gospel or for the sake of Christ. The Christian ought never to be malicious or a hypocrite. So there's a call there. But then there's the question itself. These men come, these malicious, hypocritical men. They come and they ask this question. Why is it a trick question? What's so tricky about it? Why is it like that fence question? Why is it an attempt at entrapment? Well, it is because of some recent history that Jesus doesn't even refer to here. But the recent history is this, that there was an actual insurrection under a man by the name of Judas of Galilee. Same area came from the same area of the empire, from Galilee, Judas. And in 6 AD maybe 20 years or so before this event that we're reading about today, Rome had implemented what was called the poll tax. The poll tax was not a huge tax on the people. It was a denarius about a day's wage worth. And it was a flat tax. It was levied on every Jewish adult, whether they were slave or whether they were free, male or female. It was a tax that simply was a symbol. It was a symbol of who was in charge. Everybody had to pay. It was a symbol that the reality that Judea, the homeland of the Jews, was under the thumb of the Roman Empire. That was the goal of the poll tax, reminding everybody who was in charge. But there was more to it, you see, because the poll tax had to be paid in a particular way. And the particular way that it had to be paid was with a denarius. Now, the denarius had on its front as a coin, a picture of the emperor who was held by the Romans to be a God. And on the back there was this phrase, Pontificus Maximus, which meant high priest. And so the emperor was seen as a God by the Romans and as priest, a priest and a king. To the Jews that were particularly religious, this was very offensive. It was offensive money, dirty money, pagan money. Now, the Empire understood this, and so they actually made the following provision. Most days they allowed the Jews in their day to actually mint copper coinage that had nothing on it, that didn't have to have any kind of Roman anything. And they could use the copper coins to do all kinds of transactions all the time, so they didn't have to face this all the time. They thought that was good politics. We'll let them do copper coins most days. But, but, but there was this tax, you see, they were, they were allowed to make copper coins, but never anything silver or gold. And the silver and gold was all Roman currency. And the, they had to pay the poll tax with that denarius. Now, there was a group of people who hated the Romans the most, and that group was, we know as the Zealots. You might remember that Jesus had as one of his disciples a zealot. I always have wondered what the conversations between Matthew, who would have been seen as a serious Roman sympathizer and the Zealot, might have looked like. Like over their dinner, probably. You know, we could, well, we could just imagine that. But Judas of Galilee back in 6 AD, had riled up so many people, so many people locally, over the imposition of the poll tax, these Zealots, that an insurrection occurred and that that insurrection was then put down in very bloody fashion by the Roman Empire. So this tax wasn't like our sales tax, that we just might be agitated if it goes up a percent. This tax had a history. It had a history of hating the thing. It had a history of an insurrection and of a brutal sort of putting down of that insurrection. It had a lot of history tied into this one tax. Everyone knew that. And in this case, everyone included the Pharisees, the Herodians, the crowds, the disciples and Jesus himself. They all knew this. The malicious hypocrites believed that they had asked Jesus a question with no good answer. They had asked him, "You're not afraid to touch the fence, are you?" They had asked him that if, if Jesus says that it's not lawful to pay the tax, then the Herodians could report back that another one of these Galileans is refusing to pay the tax and encouraging other people to do so. And now Jesus is seen as an insurrectionist. But if Jesus says that it's lawful to pay the tax, the Pharisees can then work the crowds. How can a person who's being hailed as the Messiah, as the rescuer of the Jews, say that it's lawful for you to pay a tax when on the coin is someone who's saying, he's the God and high priest, so they think there's no way he can answer this question. We've got him. The trap is set. The trick questions out there, how will the king. How will Jesus respond to the question? Well, he gets to this as his final answer. He says, "Therefore, render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's." And before we continue, just understand that the word render means to give back. To give back. Okay? So saying this, and the first part is this. Therefore, render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Now, how does Jesus arrive at that statement? He doesn't start there, by the way. He doesn't start just by saying that. So how does he get there? How does he get to the. What's the therefore. Therefore, he begins by asking his own question to his enemies. He says, "Show me the coin for the tax. I'll answer your question. Show me the coin for the tax." And then he asks, "Whose likeness and inscription is this?" No, I love it. It's very subtle, even there. But by asking to see the likeness and inscription and asking his own question, Jesus has moved the entire discussion away from whether paying a tax is lawful or not to everybody thinking, like, whose picture is on that coin? So now we've got to ask ourselves the question, well, whose inscription is one? Whose image? When the coin is given to Jesus, what do they see? Well, this is what they see. Like, we have presidents on our coins in Jesus' day. The image on the coin was of Emperor Tiberius, along with a little phrase that says, "Emperor Tiberius, the son of God." And on the back was that Pontificus Maximus, the High priest declaration. There was no question at all who minted the coin, who was the producer of said coin, whose coin it was. Coins with American presidents on them are coins that are minted in the United States and are property of the treasury. So coins with Tiberius were Roman coins. They were produced by the Romans. They belonged to the Romans, they belonged to Caesar. So Jesus says, "Therefore, render to Caesar what is the things that are Caesar's?" It's a declaration to those who asked him the question, well, it's not your money. I mean, you didn't produce it. You didn't mint it. Caesar did, it's Caesar. So if he wants it back, fine, give him back his money. He made it. It's this statement, by the way, that the apostle Paul fleshes out when he says things like, you know, pay taxes to whom taxes are owed and honor to whom honor is owed. The idea of just general submission to the governing authorities when it comes to paying taxes or just money generally. Christians pay their taxes. It's just money. We're not insurrectionists. We're quiet law-abiding citizens. Jesus is pressing the Pharisee interns and the Herodians, he just, he wants them to answer the question. He says, "It's not your inscription, is it? You know, we've all been at the potluck dinners here at church or we've been here at a church workday, you know, when all the tools are out and what do you do with your dishes and your tools? Like you put your name on them. Well, why? Well, because you know that that favorite ladle of yours is gone unless you've labeled it with your, with your name. Others are allowed to use those things, sure, but at the end of the day it's yours and you just want it back." Jesus' response is also putting money in its proper place. It's like he's saying, "What is money going to save you? I mean really, we're talking about Caesar here, him a coin. I mean, why do you want Caesar's money so bad? Why do you get so angry when he asks for something back that's already his?" Christians are of course just as much danger of putting way too high a value on money as, as Eric reminded us this morning, anything can become an idol. And certainly in the Bible money is one, which Jesus himself points out. You're going to serve God, you serve money. Money can become an idol. Even as we consider the passage today, I always think how the first part of Jesus' word is usually what gets emphasized. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. And then we make that a part of a theology of how we're supposed to interact with our government and what our view on taxes is supposed to be. And of course Jesus is commenting on that. We can find out some things there. But Jesus' main point is not that in fact his statement is actually putting money in its place, downplaying the whole thing, it's downplaying the whole business. Jesus' focus is on what might be considered the more subtle question which is being implied here. It's summarized in the second half of Jesus' statement. "And to God, the things that are God's" you see, the inscription on the coin meant that the coin belonged to Caesar and he could ask it back. But what inscription is on us? Whose image are we made in? Who can ask for our entire body, life, and soul back? Who has the right to do that to God? The things that are God's. The king's statement is a call to the malicious hypocrites, to the crowd, to the disciples, and to us. You are made in the image of God. His inscription is on you. You belong to him. You are his coin. Jesus is declaring in his response that he's no insurrectionist. Fine, pay the tax, whatever. But it's the malicious hypocrites who are the ones leading an insurrection. Because they aren't giving to God and to his son what they owe him. They're the men spoken of in Psalm 2. "Why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain? The kings of earth set themselves, the rulers take counsel together against the Lord, against his anointed saying, let us burst their bonds upon and cast away their cords from us." It's the malicious hypocrite who refuses to give God the things that are God's.

What do they owe him? They are standing before a man who they owe repentance to for sins against them, including this kind of obnoxious trick question they're asking. They are standing before a man who they owe their faith to, that they ought to have entire loyalty. They owe him obedience. They ought to be following Jesus the king, not seeking to entrap him or destroy him. The king is owed one's heart, one's mind, one's soul, one's strength. The king is owed one's entire worship, everything. They owe Jesus these things, and so do we. Are we rendering to God the things that are God's? This morning, he's put his inscription on you. You're made in his image. Will you render to him? Give back to him your life, everything? It's so. That's the call of Jesus. But we should also consider the benefits of heeding that call. You know, when we render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, we say, "Yeah, yeah, we'll pay taxes. Fine. I'm an American citizen. I'll pay my taxes." When we do that, you know, there's some benefits. For example, the roads are maintained. In fact, there's so much salt on the roads now, there's such a panic that you can. You know, I mean, it's great. This is what we. This is what. When you rendered to Caesar what was Caesar's. Whenever you do that, you get that. You get maintained roads. And so did they in Jesus's day. You get roads maintained, you get a sort of a sense of peace and security. We get to be in a building like this, and right now there aren't any officials coming in trying to stop us or arm people. We're able to worship freely. We're getting that benefit. When we pay render to Caesar things that are Caesar's, we get a system that's put in place, that's supposed to maintain justice and order in our land. And of course, we know that an earthly kingdom, being an earthly kingdom, can go terribly awry. The benefits of rendering to Caesar or Caesar's can dwindle marvelously. The suffering can increase, and they can still ask for money for whatever purposes. But Christ's kingdom is his kingdom, and it will never diminish and it never goes awry. I mean, when we render under God the things that are God's, we receive the benefits of being a part of his kingdom. Benefits like eternal life, like you will live forever because you belong to Jesus. Forgiveness of sins, adoption into his family. Freedom from slavery to sin. Freedom from slavery to the world. Freedom from the slavery and the wickedness of the devil. You receive purpose in life, a reason to exist. You receive open eyes so that maybe for the first time you can begin to see the goodness of God and all that he's made in the creation and in people. You receive his spirit and all the fruits that are borne by those who receive the spirit of God. When we render under God the things that are God's, we receive from him the benefits of belonging in his kingdom.

Surrender to God the things that are God's. That's the heart of what Jesus is saying. You know, the end of the incident is interesting. They all go away. But before they go away, it says that the malicious hypocrites, they marveled. And I suppose the crowds marveled and the disciples marveled because Jesus had in this shown that he was no rebel. I mean, the Herodians would have to say that he was okay with taxes, but he also was no sympathizer with the Romans, because he had kind of belittled the tax. And then he had emphasized this kind of growing importance of a relationship with the living God. Now, what Pharisee would be against that? It's all because Jesus was above all the nonsense. And the people saw it, and they marveled at the king. So do you marvel at the king this morning? Because, I mean, he's worthy of being marveled at. Jesus knows people's hearts. He knows your heart. He sees malice and hypocrisy and sin and how these things all lead to death and the judgment of God. I mean, and here is a man who laughs at trick questions and is bold enough to call people to repentance to faith in himself to obedience to follow after him and in doing so to as those who follow after him to receive that which we desperately need forgiveness and life and the many blessings that come from being a part of his kingdom. Here is a man who puts enemies in their place and puts money in its place and Caesar's in their place, lifts up God to his proper place above all things and it's this marvelous king who calls you this morning to follow him. May you do that and may we be those who call others to that same purpose that the whole world would both render to God the things that are God's and would look up and marvel at our king Jesus Christ our Lord. Let's pray.