Good morning. You can turn with me this morning to Matthew, chapter 8. If you're visiting with us today, we have been looking together in the Bible, in the New Testament, at the Gospel of Matthew. It's a good news story about Jesus, who he is, and what he is about. The first part of that book gave us the background, sort of set us up to hear about him. It tells us that Jesus is in the line of David, the king of Israel, and it talks about his miraculous birth, his baptism by his cousin John, and his connection to his Father in heaven. It talks about him being tempted by the devil in the wilderness and then the beginning of his formal ministry. 

We have seen that the message that Jesus preached and taught was really the same message that John the Baptist also preached, and that was a message of repentance because the kingdom of God is near because the King was right there, right with them. He's fleshed that out for us in what is known as the Sermon on the Mount, which is a series of teachings that Jesus gave to his disciples and the significant crowds that would come to hear him speak and to receive healing. So we finished that up, and Jesus now has finished this sermon. He's coming down from that place, and he encounters people, people like us in many ways, people who are in distress. 

We're going to look at another aspect of Jesus's ministry today. We're going to move from teaching and his instruction proclamation kind of ministry to a ministry of healing. So with that, let's hear the word of the Lord this morning. 

Matthew, chapter 8, beginning at verse 1:

"When he came down from the mountain, great crowds followed him. And behold, a leper came to him and knelt before him, saying, 'Lord, if you will, you can make me clean.' Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, 'I will; be clean.' And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And Jesus said to him, 'See that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a proof to them.' 

When he had entered Capernaum, a centurion came forward to him, appealing to him, 'Lord, my servant is lying paralyzed at home, suffering terribly.' And he said to him, 'I will come and heal him.' But the centurion replied, 'Lord, I am not worthy to have you come under my roof, but only say the word, and my servant will be healed. For I too am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. And I say to one, "Go," and he goes, and to another, "Come," and he comes, and to my servant, "Do this," and he does it.' When Jesus heard this, he marveled and said to those who followed him, 'Truly, I tell you, with no one in Israel have I found such faith. I tell you, many will come from east and west and recline at table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, while the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.' And to the centurion Jesus said, 'Go; let it be done for you as you have believed.' And the servant was healed at that very moment. 

And when Jesus entered Peter's house, he saw his mother-in-law lying sick with a fever. He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she rose and began to serve him. That evening they brought to him many who were oppressed by demons, and he cast out the spirits with a word and healed all who were sick. This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah: 'He took our illnesses and bore our diseases.' This is the word of the Lord.

This morning, next month, I'm going to be traveling to Guatemala. My nephew is getting married there, so I'm going to be zipping down for a weekend wedding and zipping back. But in order to do that, of course, you have to start getting your things together, particularly the passport. Now, many members of our family are trying to go down to this wedding, and as some of you know, we had several newly married in our family. That has created some complications with respect to passports: one, finding them; two, that names are all different and trying to figure out, well, which, you know, because what you don't want to do is be stuck in Guatemala. So we're working out this proof of citizenship. We're American citizens, we promise, but we know that you have to have the proof. They're going to require it when we get to the airport so that we can get on the plane. 

The Gospels record a lot of particular interactions that Jesus has had and displays of power and instructional teaching, and all of this, in a sense, is his passport. It is the proof that he is who he says he is and that he's coming to us from his Heavenly Father, from a heavenly kingdom, and that he is the King. So I want to just sort of help see it in this light, that Jesus here is proving who he is, and he does this with healing. He begins with a leper. A leper came to him and knelt before him. What is a leper in the Bible? You probably have pictures in your minds of leprosy, but in the Bible, physically, leprosy referred to pretty much any kind of skin condition. So it didn't have to be leprosy as we understand that maybe today. It was a variety of skin conditions that would make a person ceremonially unclean, ritually unclean, unable to do some things which most everybody else in the community would be able to do. That was the worst part of it. Of course, there was the physical suffering, but the social aspects of the suffering were far worse. 

This is the teaching on what the leper was to do from the Bible in Leviticus. It says, "The leprous person who has the disease shall wear torn clothes, let the hair of his head hang loose, and he shall cover his upper lip and cry out, 'Unclean, unclean!' Whenever he was going anywhere, he had to make this declaration so no one would come near him. He shall remain unclean as long as he has the disease. He is unclean. He shall live alone. His dwelling shall be outside the camp." So the issue was not so much his physical condition, though that was an issue, but it was his place in society, somebody who was required by law to live outside of everyone else, all by themselves, and make this declaration: "Don't come near me. Don't come near me. Don't come near me." 

And he comes to Jesus. It's a bold move on his part. The leper makes a bold move, and he comes, and he bows down. He throws himself at Jesus's feet, and he knows that this may go very, very poorly because Jesus is a teacher and a respected, at least among the people, sort of a Jewish rabbi. So he doesn't know what to expect, but he throws himself down at Jesus's feet, and he says, "Lord, if you will, you can make me clean. You can change my state." Now, Jesus, in his own right, then makes a bold statement. He says, "I will. I will. I am willing to do that. I can actually do something about your disease, and I will do it." And then he stretches out his hand, and he touches the man who is not to be touched by anyone, who is to live alone and outside. And Jesus reaches, and he touches this man. Jesus is willing to touch the unclean in order to make him clean. The power and the compassion of Jesus meet right there in that moment. Immediately, the man's leprosy leaves him, and this man is made clean. 

Jesus tells him to do something. He says, "Listen, don't say anything. Say nothing to anyone. But go and show yourself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses commanded as proof." If you were ever to be released from this situation, it was a lengthy process. It was an eight-day process of ritual that would have included him having to travel into Jerusalem to get this all done. Jesus is saying he didn't come to abolish the law. He's thoroughly Jewish. The man was instructed to obey the law. This was, on one level, to serve as proof that he was never anti-Moses. Jesus wasn't anti-Moses. He's telling the man to go and do this. Jesus also knew what it would take in order for the man to be welcomed back into the neighborhood. He would have had to have this pronouncement that he was officially now clean. 

Jesus also knew that in going to the priest, the question would be asked of the person who was leprous, "Who did this, and how did this happen to you?" It would have been the opportunity. The man would have had to proclaim that it was Jesus who did this, that Jesus could make an unclean man clean, and that would serve proof. More than anything else, that would serve as the proof that Jesus was the Christ, the King. The reason why that would serve as the proof is because there were no records at all of anyone ever healing a leper. It never happened. It didn't happen by any person. Healing a leper was understood to be an action that only God could do. By that time, it had become sort of like the teaching that the only person who could ever do this, this would be the sign that the Christ had come when lepers would be healed. 

We learned from other gospel accounts that the man didn't obey

 Jesus. Jesus told him to do this: "Don't tell anybody. Go through the process, follow the law." And the man was like, "Nope." And he went and told everybody he could find of all the great news. So the Bible says that Jesus was no longer able to walk around freely through towns. He had to keep to the rural areas in the wilderness because now everybody knew. It made it hard for him. 

Before we look at the centurion, I just pause to think: the Lord is willing in his compassion for you. He is willing to descend into your worst sins and your deepest troubles, the things that you would know in your heart and mind would make you unclean, would make people want to keep you at arm's length. Jesus descends into that. That's what he descends into. That's his way. In Christ, what happens is that he descends into our sin, and he reaches out his hand, and in great compassion, he touches the sinner. He lifts up the sinner, and he takes them from the outside and brings us into the family of God. Only Jesus can do that. You can't heal yourself of your sin and your problems and your distresses any more than this leper could heal himself of this disease. 

So that's the first healing that Matthew records, and it's followed then by an interaction that Jesus has with a centurion, a Roman officer. Now, many of you drive, and what reminded me of this is my daughter. I was taking her somewhere yesterday, and she said she saw this, I won't tell you what the bumper sticker says because I don't want us to get too distracted, but she saw this bumper sticker and said, "What do you think the person looks like that's inside the car?" Now, you all probably have done this same thing, right? Without even thinking, you see something, and it brings your attention to whatever prejudicial notion you have of what person is in this car, what they are like. You make that decision. 

A centurion was like a visible bumper sticker of the day. He was the representative of the occupier. Throughout history, many countries have occupied other countries, and rarely are occupiers seen as loved people, certainly not by the Jews. But here is this occupier, this centurion. He comes and he pleads with Jesus. He comes to Jesus and says, "I have this servant. This servant is lying paralyzed at home, and he's suffering terribly. Will you please come, or will you heal him?" The centurion comes to Jesus on behalf of someone else that he cares about. He doesn't even ask Jesus the question, actually. He just tells him, "Lord, my servant is lying paralyzed at home, suffering terribly." And Jesus gives what is considered a shocking response. He says, "I will come and heal him." Some versions of the Bible even phrase this more as a question, "Am I to come and heal him? You want me to do this? Don't you understand the state of affairs? You're a Roman conqueror, and I'm a Jewish subject teacher. What do we have to do with each other?" 

If Jesus cared one lick about public opinion, he is making a very bad public relations move here. Here’s the Roman coming to him. He could have had lots of opportunities to say his mind, to make a statement, but instead, he says, "I'll come." The centurion must have been taken aback by Jesus' response. He must have thought, "Wait a second, you're going to come to my house?" That likely generated this next phrase where the centurion says, "Lord, I am not even worthy for you to come under my roof. And by the way, anyway, I'm a man of authority. I say go, and people go, and come, and come. All you gotta do is say the word."

Two things here about the centurion, about his faith. One is actually just the humility. We tend to think of faith as something which is just like sort of belief, like I believe that these things are true. I know them, I assent to them, and then I'm sort of following after that belief, like that's faith. But faith can't be extracted from the humility that goes along with faith. There is a humility here that says, "Jesus, you are the one with power. You are the one with authority." So I'm going to appeal to you. I'm going to be a Roman centurion, a soldier, a man of authority, a well-known public figure, and I am going to beg from a Jew for his help because he knew he couldn't do anything. The humility was marvelous here to look at. And then, of course, there's the faith: only say the word. The centurion demonstrates that he believes that Jesus has authority over everything, over disease. All Jesus has to do is talk, and it's going to be okay.

So here’s this Roman, and he shows this humility, shows his faith, and so Jesus does exactly what the centurion asks. He says the word, and the Bible says that the servant was healed at that very moment. Jesus showed the passport, showed this to, "I am." But there's more here. Jesus doesn't let the opportunity go to teach about the kingdom. Jesus affirms the faith of this Gentile, this non-Jewish man, and then he paints a picture of a future feast, a feast where people come from east and west and eat with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Jesus asserts his authority as king, as the one who knows exactly what it's going to be like when we all get to the kingdom of heaven. He says, "This is what it's going to be like. This is who's going to be there. This is how it's going to be." For those who believe, who have faith like this centurion, they're going to be feasting. But Jesus also says that there will be those who reject him, and they'll be his own people, and those who reject him will be thrown into the outer darkness. Life without Christ, the light of the world, is darkness. It's just darkness. 

Jesus, in marveling at the centurion's faith, lays things out. He says, "Faith in Christ leads to life and light and feast. Rejection of Christ leads to death and hell and darkness." Just to pause a moment, the centurion, on the face, just if you saw him, you may have judged and hated him by virtue of the fact that he was a Roman, something which was largely out of his control. He was a Roman. But not Jesus, because Jesus looks at the heart. He looks at faith. He may love a person whom we might look at with some sort of prejudicial disdain. Jesus today is looking at you, everyone here. No one's heart is outside of his sight. He sees our very heart. What will he find there? Does he find the centurion's humility? Does he find the faith that trusts the Lord, the faith that demands nothing but sees everything that he has as a gift from God? What does he see when he looks in your heart? Because he sees the heart.

Jesus interacts with the centurion, and then Matthew takes us to the home of Jesus's friend Peter, his disciple, and he finds Peter's mother-in-law sick with a fever. As I was thinking about this section, all kinds of mother-in-law jokes sort of ran through my head, but none will be told. But here is Jesus with this sick woman. I just am finishing a round of sickness myself, or finished it, and as all of you know, being sick is not fun. There's just nothing fun about it. I remember as a kid, you could sort of miss school for a day, and that was kind of fun for day one or day two, and your parents pampered you a little bit. But even that got old after a while and probably old for your parents after a while, and so the pampering kind of slowed down, and you kind of got back at it. Being sick isn't fun. You feel sort of useless, maybe a little depressed. Often you feel so bad, you can't really think clearly, and if you've got a fever, that's unpleasant. You get the shakes, you're up at night, can't sleep super well, you're just lying around. Although everybody's trying to be very nice to you, you know that you are not being very helpful. You're just sick. 

Here's Peter's mother-in-law. Peter was wealthy enough, we see here, to have a home and to take care of his mother-in-law, who was likely a widow. There she is, but she's lying sick. She's got a fever. Jesus just heals her. Nobody asked anything. He comes in and sees her there. He touches her hand, the fever leaves her, and Peter didn't approach Jesus about her. She didn't plead with him for anything. He just, on his own volition, went over, touched her hand, and up she came. He healed her. It's a simple story. There's no real fanfare there, but again, a lesson for us here. Jesus is always working in all the details. He cares about all the little stuff too. No healing is too small. No person is too insignificant for his attention. Such a simple healing, this woman, but we know as Christians that much of what the Lord does in our life isn't dramatic stuff. It's all this kind of basic things. Simple, no real fanfare. 

It's the mother-in-law's response that the scripture chooses to emphasize. It says that he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she rose and began to serve him. There's no record of any words, nothing that she said, but simply this: just service. Healing leads to proclaiming Christ, like the leper did, but it ought also to lead to serving him, like the mother-in-law did

. Anyway, crowds start to gather. They bring Jesus their sick, and then Matthew sums up this entire section when he says, "This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah: 'He took our illnesses and bore our disease.'" That's a quote from Isaiah 53, and Matthew quotes this text with the broader reference in mind. Sickness and healing are a focus of that Isaiah passage, but the greater focus of the passage and the overall work that's spoken of in that particular part of the Old Testament is the work of the suffering servant, of the Messiah, of the Christ. So in that way, all healings, all scripture point to this man, Jesus, point to the healing of the cross. 

As we consider the ministry of Jesus, we see here, and we'll see in the future, that healing is always with a purpose beyond the healing itself. Whenever you feel better, of course, there's great reason to rejoice, and they're doing that, of course. There's great rejoicing in a leper who is no longer a leper, great rejoicing in a centurion's servant who suddenly jumps out of bed and is better, and great rejoicing in a dear woman whose fever leaves. But when Jesus heals, it has an even greater purpose than that. All the time, whenever he does that in the Bible. And here they are: one is a passport purpose. Jesus heals to show us who he is. In all the healings we see, we see the authority and power of Christ over illness or disease. All illness, even sin and death itself, have no power over him. He is the King. He is the Christ. He's always showing that whenever he heals somebody. So it's not just about the healing itself; it's about who he is and what he's like. 

His willingness to heal, his willingness to make us clean, his compassion on the Gentile, his compassion on the outcast, his compassion on the friend, on the wealthy, on the poor, his compassion on sinners, sinners who are saved then by grace. This is who Jesus is. Every time there's a healing in the Bible, we are meant to see this is who Jesus is. This is what he's like. It's a call to worship him as the King. But it's not just a passport purpose of just saying, "Hey, here's Jesus' identification." It's also a pointing purpose because he continues to heal today. His healings in scripture point us to this aspect of his ministry. He heals today through the prayers of his people. The Apostle John, James has a bit to say about that in his letter. Every affliction, every disease, nothing is outside of his power to heal, and we ought to, and we do every Sunday, pray for those who are sick, that the Lord would work either through the doctors or outside of them to help those people that we love. And that's okay because Jesus heals diseases. 

But his healings point to an even greater healing. The scripture says, and Ted read to us earlier, that it's by the wounds of Christ that we are healed. It is by his wounds that we are healed. Because of the wounds of Jesus on the cross, we can be healed of our sin. We can be healed of the effects of the fall. We can, in Christ, then, because we're healed of that, we will live forever. It's the message of the gospel. It's good news. There is a resurrection. You will always be with the Lord. There is coming a time where there are no more laying around with fevers, no more suffering, no more sin, no more pain. There's just life. There's just true healing. 

Jesus continues to heal people in this way, continues through his people and by his spirit to proclaim the message of the kingdom, that there is forgiveness of sinners, salvation in him, and eternal life for all who believe. So there's this purpose in every healing that's meant to point us, to show us who Jesus is, and then to point us to remind us that anytime we get better from anything, when I'm standing up here today and I'm feeling better, the first thought I ought to have is, boy, am I thankful that the worst disease he's healed on the cross. Because, you know, here's the story. The story is that even though I feel better today, I can count on a day coming where I'm not going to feel good again. That's the way it is, except that in Christ, there's healing that is a forever healed. So it's a pointing purpose. And then finally, it's a purpose for his people. He heals us so that we will no longer be on the outside. In Christ, you have been reconciled to God and one another. He wants you to know, he wants you to know today, that you are an important part of the community of faith and that there is no one who is insignificant among us. There is not a person in this room, not a man, not a woman, not a child, that is insignificant in the sight of God. He reaches down and he saves people so that they would know that they belong, that you are not alone, ever. 

He heals us that our faith might be both seen and might increase. We trust him to forgive our sins, to heal our bodies, our minds, our hearts. We grow as we see him doing this. He heals us that we might serve him. Jesus didn't save us that we might do nothing and wait around for him to come again. He calls us to serve him with our whole heart, mind, soul, and strength, to love our neighbor, to find ways to do that. He heals us that we might praise and proclaim his name. There are no leper restrictions for us. He does not tell us as Christians, "Oh, hold on, don't tell anybody." He says, "Tell everybody." So we live and we speak out the gospel because of the healing of Christ. He calls us to this purpose, a purpose for his people. All these purposes are pictured here in the supper. In the supper, we're reminded of who Christ is, what he's done. In the supper, we have a picture of that greater healing that Christ brings: forgiveness of sin. In the supper, we have the picture of his purposes for his people as he calls us together and reminds us of who we are as Christians.

All Christians, everyone, at some point, and maybe at many points, have come to Christ. You may remember the last time or the time when you came to Christ. You came as a leper, came as a centurion, came as somebody who knew they couldn't heal themselves, came as a sinner. And you walked, you ran to him, you threw yourself down in front of him, and you asked, "Will you heal me? Will you save me? Will you forgive me?" And he looked at you, and he reached out his hand, and he said, "I will." Praise God. 

Let's pray. 

Oh Lord, we're grateful that when we were on the outside, you brought us in. And we're grateful that when we had no ground to stand on, nothing in ourselves to bring, that Christ died on the cross for our sins. And so to his cross, we can cling for healing and for life. We're grateful that you see us, you see our need, and you care. May we serve you with our whole heart, mind, soul, and strength, and proclaim your name before all people. It's in the name of Jesus that we pray these things. Amen.