# Jesus the Prophet: The End of the Age

You can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 24. We're going to be looking at the first part of that today. This last week I officiated at the funeral of a friend's mother. And then I had the opportunity to go and to visit Paul at the viewing of his mother. And the truth just is always becomes very evident in those kinds of things that death is something that is very difficult. It's a regular reminder. It happens so often, so much. It's a regular reminder of the fallenness of this world and of our inability to just keep things going.

Most people try to avoid talking about death as much as possible, but sometimes we think about it and we ask questions. What's going to happen to me when I die? What will happen when I die? And that's a good question. It's a very important question. How things will end for each one of us ought to be reflected on. And of course, for the Christian, that reflection is not without hope.

But there's a similar piece of reflection which is much more general and probably not reflected on as often. And that is this. Not just how will I. What will happen to me when I die? But. But how does the whole world end? How does it end?

Growing up during the Cold War, of course, there was always this sense that at any moment that it all could end in a wide worldwide nuclear conflict that just would wipe out all living things. He had a very strong sense of that. And we're kind of taught that even though nothing has really changed with respect to that possibility, the fact is that a nuclear conflict hasn't materialized. And so others have speculated at different times that maybe what will eventually end it all will be. There'll be a big meteor that will sort of smash into the planet and that will end it. Maybe it'll be the slow death of a climate crisis.

But Christians, well, we're just. We're not really even strangers to end time speculation, are we? The very real truth that we proclaim each and every week is in the Bible that I believe that Jesus will come again to judge the living and the dead. What we call the return of Christ or the Second Coming has led Christians to speculate throughout all of history about when and what kinds of events will occur that will sort of precede Christ's return. The Second Coming.

Today, as we come to the text of Scripture in the Gospel of Matthew, and as we continue our look at the final week of Jesus earthly life and ministry leading up to his death on the cross, we have Jesus interacting with his disciples. You'll hear this. And the disciples, it says that it's a private conversation. So he's. He often is talking to everybody, the crowds and just, you know, maybe his enemies. But here we. We have this private conversation. So we're. We're the fly on the wall. We get to hear, listen in to what Jesus has to say.

And there's this conversation. We're going to be considering it for a few weeks. But it's a conversation in which Jesus answers a question he's asked by the disciples. And the question concerns the end, or the end of the age, as they will say.

This question comes on the heels of a tense dialogue between Jesus and the religious leadership of his day in the temple. That tense dialogue ended with Jesus calling together the crowds and the disciples and sort of laying out the truth about the Pharisees, that they're all hypocrites. And he's declaring them in their wickedness and declaring woes upon them. It ends with him weeping over Jerusalem and its state, noting that the Temple is now left desolate, weeping over the rebellion of the people against God and against his king.

And in the story, Jesus has now gone from that conversation. He's left the temple intense. It has been an incredibly sad and difficult day, one can imagine for him personally. Like, I mean, the entire day was spent dealing with attacks, the realization of what you were declaring, the sadness of the rejection of the people against their God. And so Jesus is leaving the temple. And that's where the text picks up this morning from Matthew 24. Starting at verse one,

```
Jesus left the temple and was going away when his disciples came to point out to him the buildings of the temple. Temple. But he answered them. You see all these, do you not? Well, truly I say to you, there will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down. As he sat on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, tell us, when will these things be? And what will be the sign of your coming and the end of the age?

And Jesus answered them, see that no one leads you astray. For many will come in my name, saying, I am the Christ, and they will lead many astray. You will hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that you are not alarmed, for this must take place. But the end is not yet. For a nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in various places. All these are but the beginning of the birth pains.

And then they will deliver you up the tribulation and put you to death. And you will be hated by all nations for my name's sake. Then many will fall away and betray one another and hate one another. And many false prophets will arise and lead many astray. And because lawlessness will be increased, the love of many will grow cold. But the one who endures to the end will be saved. And this gospel of the kingdom will be proclaimed throughout the whole world as a testimony to all nations. And then the end will come.

So when you see the abomination of desolation spoken of by the prophet Daniel standing in the holy place, let the reader understand. Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains. Let the one who is on the housetop not go down to take what is in his house. Let the one who is in the field not turn back to take his cloak. And alas for women who are pregnant, and for those who are nursing infants. In those days, pray that your flight may not be in winter or on a Sabbath, for then there will be great tribulation. Such has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, and never will be. And if those days had not been cut short, no human being would be saved. But for the sake of the elect, those days will be cut short.

Then, if anyone says to you, look, here is the Christ, or there he is, don't believe it. For false Christs and false prophets will rise and perform great signs and wonders, wonders so as to lead astray if possible. Even the elect. See, I've told you beforehand. So if they say to you, look, he's in the wilderness, do not go out. And if they say, look, he's in the inner rooms, do not believe it. For as the lightning comes from the east and shines as far as the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures shall gather.

Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken. Then will appear in heaven the sign of the Son of Man. And then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he will send out his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of the heaven to the other.

From the fig tree learn its lesson. As soon as its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know the summer is near. So also, when you See all these things, you know that he is near at the very gates. Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place. Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
```

This is the word of the Lord.

This morning last week we began to look and consider that Jesus came as a king, but he also came as a prophet. And that's really important. It's important even as we're looking at this text today, because what Jesus is doing is he's speaking in a way that is prophetic in the Bible. As I mentioned last week, the prophets often had the job, it's sort of the unfortunate job of being the Lord's prosecuting attorneys. They would come and they would describe the case against the people and their leaders for how they had sort of disobeyed the Lord and this or that thing. And, and that's what we saw last week when Jesus was pronouncing woes on the Pharisees.

But it's also true that much of the prophecy in the Bible has a predictive element to it. And it would be good to just touch on this briefly because I think it's important to sort of try to understand what it is that Jesus is saying.

The first thing about these predictions is they're not so vague as to be useless. In other words, when you go to your favorite Chinese restaurant and get your fortune cookie at the end and open up that cookie and you read what's on the little piece of paper, that prediction will say something like this. This year you will experience something unique. Thanks.

And so the predictions in the Bible, the predictive element of prophecy is not so vague as to be useless like that. But the predictions are also not so precise as to present life in a mechanical kind of coldly pre, predetermined way. Like you'll never hear a prophet or, or Jesus say something like on March 3, 2028, the following event will occur. So it's never vague and it's never so precise. It's an odd thing that way that, that causes engineer academic types of Christians to go absolutely, absolutely crazy, because why can't he just give us to us straight?

But the predictions always of prophecy are sufficient enough to drive one to take action. And that's what it's always about. It's always to drive someone to take action, to make a person watch for full Just as an additional aside, and we'll see this in this text as we go on in the weeks ahead, but the, the predictions also have like two or more Fulfillments. There's often something that they'll predict will have something that will have occurred very much in a contemporary way, and then something that looks forward and to a later time, and then sometimes to even a later time after that.

That you see, the predictions of the prophet are always less about the prediction and more about moving people to direct their attention towards God. They always have that as the objection. They want as the object to direct a person's attention towards their God, to take some action.

Now, there is a question. There is something that happened that led to all of this. And you can see it right at the beginning of our text today. Jesus has left the temple, okay? And he's just had this very, very contentious day in the temple. He's leaving, he's going away. And the disciples, who we love, because they're very much like us, they have listened to this entire dialogue at this point in time. And what they do is as they're leaving the temple, a couple of them come up to Jesus and they sort of say, jesus, look how beautiful the temple is. Look how beautiful all the stonework is in the temple.

And maybe I thought about this because it seemed like an odd thing that they would say to Jesus after this very. Where he says, you know, your house is laid desolate and the temple is empty. They're for them to come and say, but the temple looks really good. But they. But they do this. And I wonder if maybe they're just a little bit nervous at this point in time. Like they're nervous about some of the things Jesus is saying. His comments about the desolate house or the fact that he came in and he overturned all of the tables of the money changers. Or. Or that when those who were in charge of the temple, the religious leaders, that. That he was like, arguing all the time with them. He's quite contentious. Or then there's all those regular comments that Jesus had made about how he was coming to Jerusalem to die.

So now maybe all of that is sort of swimming around in their heads. And so they want to sort of distract Jesus, get him to think about something else. So they comment about the temple, how beautiful it looks. And Jesus, in his patient way, is quite direct. You see all of these stones that you are admiring, truly, I say to you, there will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down.

And then they leave the city. I mean, this is like your kid coming up to you and saying, dad, isn't that like just a beautiful. A beautiful building? And you responding, it's going to be rubble in a few years. And your whole way of life as you know it is going to be destroyed. Okay, thanks, dad. But Jesus is saying that. That's what he's saying. He's saying that this is going to happen like that.

So now a little time has passed since that interaction. And Jesus is sitting overlooking the city on the Mount of Olives, and the disciples want to follow up. So they approach him privately and they ask him the question, tell us, when will these things be? What will be the sign of your coming and the end of the age?

Now, whether the disciples want to know when what Jesus said about the temple would actually happen, what will be the signs of that? And when is he going to come and pick up his kingdom, his throne, and start reigning as king? I mean, when is this new kingdom, the kingdom of God that he's been proclaiming for three years? When is it going to be established? When is this going to happen? What's going on? They want to know.

And two focal points become clear over the entire conversation. One sort of a near focal point, one far. The near focal point corresponds to the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD and it deals directly with the disciples question. Prophetically. The other focal point, which the disciples likely didn't even have in mind, was the second coming of Christ in the final judgment.

But Jesus is going to bring that forward too. The first focal point would be experienced personally, would be lived, actually lived by the disciples. And the other focal point would occur later on one, which we still wait for as Christians today, for Jesus's return.

What Jesus is speaking of here as the prophet, as the king, is that the age that the disciples were living in, the age of the temple as the center of worship, the age of the sacrifices and of the law, as the Pharisees sort of understood the law, the age of the kingdom of Israel as the earthly kingdom where God's presence dwelt, that that was all coming to an end. And that's because Christ would be the fulfillment of all of that. He was everything that the Old Testament was pointing to. He is the Temple in that he serves as the mediator between God and man. He's the perfect atoning sacrifice, so there's no more need for sacrifices. He's the perfect high priest, so the temple isn't necessary. He is the word of God. And he shows us in his life and words how we're to live. And he's poured out his Holy Spirit on us to point us to Christ, to grow us as Christians, so that the law in all of its ceremonial and civil aspects would simply be no longer necessary.

He is the king of a heavenly kingdom that cannot be destroyed and which one day will be the only kingdom. A new heavens and a new earth. The Bible says with Christ as king. And so the land of Israel as an earthly kingdom with an earthly king would no longer be necessary because the entire earth would be Jesus kingdom.

But in order for the new age to begin, the old age had to end. I think about the disciples, that must have been a very painful thing for them to think about. I mean, all they had known was tied up in the temple and in worship, their understanding of worship in that way. And Jerusalem as sort of the center of all things. I mean the crowds, they never expected that the Christ, the coming king, the Messiah, that what he would come to do was to announce the destruction of the temple. That would have made no sense. What they wanted, they wanted a king, they wanted a messiah who would come with the chief priests at his side, who would come and re establish glorious temple worship after chucking out all the Roman occupiers. That was the vision. They wanted a king who would make Israel great again, would return her to the earthly abundance and blessing that had been known under King David and King Solomon.

Jesus was delivering the anti message to the message that they believed and wanted about the Messiah. He just was, he was giving them a prophetic message that says all the stones have to be thrown down.

So the disciples want to know when, when's it going to happen? And that's where we get to our text, the heart of the text. Today Jesus says some things here. The first thing that we see Jesus predicting is some bad weather. In other words, things are not going to be easy for the Christians early on and for the disciples, the storm clouds would be brewing. We can see this here.

Jesus says that first thing he says is there's going to be false messiahs, false Christs, false prophets. Many will come in my name saying I am the Christ. And they will lead many astray. Many false prophets will rise and lead many astray. False Christs, false prophets will rise and perform great signs and wonders so as to lead astray if possible. Even the elect. There's a theme here. Jesus says the bad weather is coming. And part of that's going to be that there's going to be just falsehood everywhere. There's going to be those who are false claimants to power, to being even the Christ. And it would only happen more and more as the situation got worse.

We know historically that in the Roman era of occupation, a person rising up and claiming to be a savior or a messiah was not so uncommon. Christ wasn't unique in calling him Jesus, wasn't unique and calling himself the Christ. Others had done that. Jesus says that these false messiahs, false Christs, false prophets will arise.

And then he says there's going to be wars, there's going to be natural disasters. You'll hear of wars and rumors of wars. Nation will rise against nation, kingdom against kingdom, famines, earthquakes. Nothing new here. But before the temple would be destroyed, it would be happening in a more intensified way. All this Jesus said you could consider as birth pangs. It's happening, things are intensifying, and then there's going to be an increase in lawlessness.

He says, you, I mean, this is what they have to look forward to. They will deliver you up to tribulation and put you to death, which at least 11 of the 12 were put to death. And you'll be hated by all nations for my name's sake. And many will fall away and betray one another and hate one another. And because lawlessness will be increased, the love of many will grow cold.

You see, before the new age would sort of fully come into play here and the old would go away, the temple would be destroyed. There would be persecution and hatred towards Christians. Some would even be put to death for their faith in Christ. Some would fall away and betray the church because of pressure. Some would be led astray because everybody wants a savior in times of distress. And maybe they were getting impatient. And there would be these false Christs that would arise, leading people away from the Lord. Some would find their love for the Lord growing cold. If the Lord loves us and there's all this intense stuff going, going on all around us in our country, why doesn't he do anything about it? Maybe there's nothing to this. Why doesn't he come now? Their love for him grows cold. Moral decay of that kind would precede the temple's destruction.

And then he gives one more the abomination of desolation, standing in the holy place. You know, there was a lot happening before the destruction of Jerusalem that's recorded for us. And we know some things. Maybe this is referring to the Roman general who would eventually enter into the temple. Of course, before that, there were the Jewish zealots who had entered into the temple and were fighting a civil war within the temple Temple precincts for a couple years before the Romans even came.

Maybe, I mean, I mean, Jesus, the king of all creation, had just called the religious leaders Robbers and hypocrites. Maybe he's talking about them. Maybe they're the lawless ones. They're the ones who killed Jesus while continuing to offer sacrifices on the altar for people's sins. Maybe they're talking about him. Them. The suggestion is made that the reader of the Gospel of Matthew would understand the one who had it in his hands at the time.

In any case, this would be maybe the most significant sign that the temple would be destroyed and that it was time to take some action. The summary of it all was that there would be a lot of tribulation. That sounds awful. There would be a lot of tribulation. Things are going to get incredibly intense. But that it would be mercifully cut short, that it wouldn't last for a very long, long extended number of years. Which it didn't.

Jesus makes clear that all of this would be happening, that there would be signs of the end of the age, but that there was time. There was time for the Christians to take action. It wasn't right now, it wasn't going to happen tomorrow. It was time.

So Jesus gives the disciples all of this. But even more helpfully, he then tells them what they ought to do. When I was a young boy, I remember a day very fairly, vividly playing out in the summertime with my brothers out in the yard. And my mom was on the back deck kind of watching us. And she asked if I would pick up the baseball that was lying there next to, I think, like next to her, flowers or something. She was concerned. And so I went over to pick up the baseball, except that it wasn't a baseball. It was solid ice. And I said, mom, it's not a baseball. And then more baseballs began to fall from the sky. And my mom kicked into gear and called us in from a hailstorm that damaged everything. My dad got a free roof out of it, so that was good. But it began to damage everything, but it didn't damage us.

Now, why was that? Well, that's because she read signs, you know, boy says mom, it's not a baseball. Her brain kicks into action. Oh, that means it's hail. And then she's concerned when she sees a couple more in the yard, that they would hurt if they hit you. And so she calls us all in. She takes action. She read the sign. She took action. Action.

Jesus says to his disciples, read the signs and then take action. It's a point of his prophecy, Take some action. And here's what he tells them to do. The main instruction Jesus gives at the very End. He says, watch. Read the signs from the fig tree. Learn its lesson. As soon as its branch becomes tender and puts out its leaves, you know the summer is near. So. So also, when you see all these things, you know that he's near. At the very gates, he tells them to learn that lesson.

When you see these things that I've been talking about, know that the end of Jerusalem and the temple and the age of the temple, the sacrifices, the law, the regulations, the geographical land of Israel is the place where God's people were. No, that it's all coming to a violent end. Watch the signs.

And as they watch, they're also instructed multiple times to not be led astray. Make sure that no one leads them astray. They're not to be alarmed by the trials and tribulations that they're going to face, like being killed and arrested and. And persecuted, and not to be alarmed by that. They're not to be scared by wars and rumors of wars, natural disasters and all the persecutions that they were to suffer. They're just not to go astray. They got to keep focused.

And when all this happens, they should prepare to flee. He says when the time comes, when they see these things happen, when they see the Roman armies coming towards Jerusalem, getting ready to surround it, whatever's happening there, all the. When it. When it becomes apparent that it's time, get out of there.

And then they were supposed to endure to the end. They would prepare to flee and then endure to the end. This was going to be hard. Following Jesus wasn't going to be easy. What kind of Christ is that? Right? I mean, you could. That's what everybody wants. They weren't looking to follow Jesus so that their life could become worse, difficult. I mean, were you looking to follow Jesus so that your life would become more difficult?

And yet when we follow Jesus, we find that in some ways our life becomes more difficult. And they certainly found this out. But the call was to endure to the end. It wasn't going to be hard. It was going to be hard, and some are going to jump ship. But the call of the disciples was to endure. And as we read the entire New Testament, we often hear that same call to Christians all the time. That our call is to endure. Endure difficulty. We're running a race. We're heading to a finish line.

And finally, in this tribulation, there's this prayer that he says, and pray for God's help. Times are going to be hard, so you need to pray for God's help. You're going to need help in this. And so you do. It's going to be bad weather. It's going to be a most tumultuous time. There are actions to take.

But Jesus doesn't end there. Jesus also declares how it's going to end, the end of the age. And the first thing is to understand that the end is a beginning. You see, it's going to be a beginning. The kingdom of Christ is going to be established even as the king temple was being destroyed. Those things are happening at the same time even as the temple. All this stuff is going, heading towards the end of one age. A new age is emerging. The kingdom of Christ.

Jesus declares it here. He says, and this gospel of the kingdom will be proclaimed throughout the whole world as a testimony to all nations. The kingdom of Christ will be established. The gospel is going to go and forward into all nations. He even proclaims this prophetically by referencing Old Testament prophecies. He calls, says that the elect are going to be called from the four winds. He's gathering these elect and that the nations will mourn.

That's right, from Zechariah says this, that the prophet Zechariah in the Old Testament says, I'm going to pour out on the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of grace. Grace pleads for mercy, so that when they look on me, on him whom they have pierced, they will mourn as one mourns for an only child and weeps bitterly over him as one weeps.

I'm reminded at Pentecost, when all the nations of the earth gathered in Jerusalem and there's Peter proclaiming the gospel, and they are the people having to face the truth about him whom they have pierced, that they have killed the Christ. They crucified him. The Bible tells us that at Pentecost they were cut to the heart, that they mourned as they looked on the one who they had just crucified and who was now risen. And they asked, what must we do?

Jesus also refers to his coming at this point, like in Daniel 7. Behold, with the clouds of heaven there came one like a son of man. And he came not to the earth, but to the Father, to the ancient of days. And was presented before him. And to him was given dominion and glory, and a kingdom that all peoples, nations and languages would serve him, his dominions and everlasting dominion, but shall not pass away his kingdom, one that shall not be destroyed. Christ was coming to claim his kingdom from the Father. It was the beginning of an eternal kingdom.

Jesus is declaring that here he's also declaring that the beginning is an end. And again he uses prophetic language. You've heard this. Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.

Jesus is not saying something that hasn't been said before. It's the Old Testament prophet said the same thing. This is what Isaiah said before the destruction of Babylon. Behold, the day of the Lord comes cruel with wrath and fierce anger to make the land a desolation, to destroy its sinners from it. For the stars of the heaven and their constellations won't give their light. The sun will be dark at its rising, the moon will not shed its light. And I will punish the world for its evil and the wicked for their iniquity. And I'll put an end to the pomp of the arrogant and I'll lay low the poor pompous pride of the ruthless. God has said he's doing that in Babylon.

Ezekiel used the same language to describe the punishment coming to Egypt. Raise a lamentation over Pharaoh, king of Egypt. Because when I blot you out, I'll cover the heavens. I'm going to make the stars dark. I'm going to cover the sun with a cloud. The moon shall won't give its light. The bright lights of heaven will I make dark over you. I'll put darkness on your land, declares the Lord. I will trouble the hearts of many peoples when I bring your destruction among the nations.

And now it's being used by Jesus, that same language. This will be the end, a cosmic picture of an earthly reality. Jerusalem is going to be laid low just like Babylon was laid low. Just like Egypt was laid low. It would be made desolate. God's judgment on his rebellious people is complete.

Jesus says the old order is coming to an end. And the new order, with Christ, with himself enthroned in heaven, was beginning. The first generation of Christian disciples are going to live to see it all, he said. This generation will not pass away until all these things take place as the conversation continues.

And we'll see that all this that occurs in Jerusalem is to be a picture of the great end and the great beginning that's all tied into the second coming of Christ. We'll look at that in detail in the weeks ahead.

But the end and beginning that Jesus is talking about, an end and beginning that occurred along time ago, now has great relevance for us as Christians today. And probably of primary greatest relevance of all is that what's being proclaimed and what happened means that Jesus Christ reigning now. He is the King now. We are a part of his kingdom.

The Bible says that we are ambassadors of Christ. That we are the we are the light of the world, the salt of the earth. The Bible says that we are his servants, that we're called to do his will in the world in a myriad of different ways. Loving God and loving others in Jesus name. The Bible says that we are his people in his kingdom and so we belong to him. That he'll protect, he'll guide and keep us to the end of our days. And that we ought to learn to love one another and care for one another and and not neglect gathering together.

And because Jesus Christ is reigning now, it's the absolute truth that all of us will bow before him as our King. All of us will face him one day. Every person here will face Christ one day. Will we face him as rebels like those religious leaders? Like the vast number of people in Jerusalem? Or will we rejoice in him as our Lord as those who are here today? There is time. That's what we have, time. If you've not yet done this, to repent and to follow Jesus. As sure as Jesus words were about Jerusalem, so they are about his ruling and reigning as king and as the judge of all men. Don't reject him. Receive him as your king.

And secondly, first that Christ is reigning now. And secondly, that for us today, the call of Christians in the tumultuous era of the scriptures that described here, the end of one era and the beginning of the next is also our call. As those who live in our own tumultuous time in a fallen world waiting for its final redemption when Christ returns. We are to endure. We are to pray. We are to watch and be aware. We are to wait for the final redemption in Christ. We are to take action.

Those actions know for certain that the Lord is coming again as the writer of Hebrews encourages us. Take care brothers, lest be there be in you any evil, unbelieving heart leading you to fall away from the living God Exhort one another every day as long as it's called today that none of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. We have come to share in Christ if indeed we hold our original confidence all the way to the end.

Let's endure together. Life is difficult. We are jars of clay. And we live in a world that's tumultuous. It's violent, it's lawless, it's full of greed. It's full of arrogance, selfishness. It's full of anxiety. It's full of moral decay. But as the gospel has gone out into the world, the church, the church us together. The Church stands as the place of light and life in the world. We're it. And that's because the gospel of Christ that Jesus died for our sins, rose again and now is reigning and is coming again. The Gospel brings light and life to the heart. It is the treasure that is placed in these jars of clay. And in the same way the church, we have the treasure for a dying world.

May we be faithful to the one who has given us that treasure. May we speak of the Gospel often and freely. May our eyes be fixed always on Christ our King. May our hearts be completely, completely, 100% devoted to him and not tied to the things of this world. And may our lives be spent in his service for his glory and the good of others. And may we wait and watch with great anticipation for that glorious day when Christ returns and all is set right.

Let's pray.
