Good morning. You can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 11. Last week, we continued our walk through the Gospel of Matthew, and we read that John, Jesus' cousin, John the Baptist, was in jail. He had confronted King Herod, who ruled over Jerusalem and the surrounding regions at the time with the support of the Roman Empire. He had confronted him about Herod's adulterous relationship with the king's sister-in-law. Eventually, John would lose his life because he spoke up about this. John's own disciples are with him in jail. They're ministering to him, and word about Jesus and sort of the excitement that surrounded him had come to John's ears. So he had sent his disciples to Jesus to ask him if he was the one, if he was the Christ, if he was the man who was the son of the Lord and the one that they were looking for to come.

And Jesus responded to John, and we looked at that last week. We talked about it, about what witnesses, those who were there, the witnesses to Jesus' life, ministry, death, and resurrection, what they saw and what they heard and what that means for us. So in the story, John's disciples head back to report to John what Jesus has said to them, and what that leaves is the crowds around Jesus, and so he begins to speak to them again, and that's what we're going to look at this morning, Matthew chapter 11, verses 7 through 19.

So hear the word of the Lord. As they went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning John. "What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? What then did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in kings' houses. Well, what then did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet. This is he of whom it is written, 'Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.' Truly, I say to you, among those born of women, there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist. Yet the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and the violent take it by force. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John, and if you're willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come. He who has ears to hear, let him hear. But to what shall I compare this generation? It's like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling to their playmates, 'We played the flute for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not mourn.' For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, 'He has a demon.' The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, 'Look at him, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!' Yet wisdom is justified by her deeds."

This is the word of the Lord this morning. When I was in elementary school, and maybe if you have elementary-age kids or had them, you'll remember this kind of experience. Sometimes they'll come up to you, and they'll say something like, "Try this," and they hold out some item for you to try. And for us, it was always these little things you could buy, a fake stick of gum. Those of you who are old enough to remember this, you'd pull the piece of gum out, and there was some sort of mousetrap thing that, when you pulled the gum out, would snap on the person's finger. And of course, as elementary-age school kids, there's a certain, as a parent, you learn that "try this" is accompanied by a certain sort of sick gleeful smile that you weren't going to try it at all, ever.

And so, this is the way. And what happens is that when you say, "No, I'm not going to do that," or no one grabs the stick of gum, you're sort of disappointed, disappointed that they won't play along with your prank. Everyone has had their pranks and tricks that they've tried and the ones also that they've suffered the consequences of. It's all fool's play, but of course, they're just pranks, and for the most part, relatively harmless.

Jesus is looking at the crowd, and he sees them playing a far more dangerous game. And it's one that concerns their souls, and it's connected to Jesus himself and to John who was before him. He says, "What am I going to compare to what shall I compare this generation? This generation is like some children playing together, and what do you want to play? Well, one says, 'Let's play wedding,' and the other says, 'No, I don't want to play wedding; let's play funeral.' And they can't come to an agreement. We're playing the flute, and you're not dancing. We're pretending to, we're singing a dirge, and you're not pretending to mourn. No one's happy because they can't agree on what to play. The game is no fun. They are complaining. Their playmates aren't cooperative, and that's the children. They play in that way. If you have kids, you know those types of situations. Well, they're not really playing; they're just arguing with each other and complaining. They're a little upset."

Jesus is talking about himself and about John and commenting that whereas the crowd and particularly the religious leaders want them to play in a certain way, they found Jesus and John quite uncooperative, and they complain about them. They say foolish things. They talk about John. Jesus comments that John came to them neither eating nor drinking. What we know about John the Baptist was that he was a wilderness prophet of sorts. He had no earthly comforts that he particularly enjoyed. He didn't enjoy living in any kind of luxury at all. He was very strict in his diet and in his way, as were his disciples, and sometimes there's sort of these questions that they have about Jesus with respect to that. John's disciples do. They were very strict in their adherence to the law, and John would say some very direct, rough things, and he just wouldn't dance. The Pharisees, we find out later, didn't know what to make of them. The common people thought pretty highly of them. They'd go out to see them, but he was a bit too harsh, a little too dangerous, and he couldn't be controlled. He didn't play the game. So the leaders branded him as follows. They said he has a demon. This is a man who Jesus says is the greatest man who was ever born up to himself, and the conclusion of the crowd or the religious leaders was he has a demon. Foolish words.

They also said foolish words about Jesus. Jesus, the Son of Man, came eating and drinking. He was known publicly for being around all kinds of people all the time. He lived his whole life out in the open, including not just religious people but tax collectors and sinners. Many times in Jesus' ministry, some of the most significant things that happened weren't out in the wilderness. They were out in the wilderness. They were out in the wilderness and at feasts and parties. A wedding in Cana. He's having dinner with a ton of people at Matthew's house, and another feast he's having at the home of a Pharisee later on and at the Passover meal. He had quite a different reputation than John did. He was a different kind of person. He wouldn't mourn as much as the religious leaders might have wanted. He was a bit too loose in his Sabbath-keeping for their liking, a bit too friendly with sinners. He was someone who was outside of all the categories that they were used to, and a real challenge to the religious leaders and the Roman authorities, is he didn't play the game. He couldn't be controlled, and so the leaders branded him as a hedonist of sorts. This is the Son of God, and they said, "Look at him; he's a glutton. Look at him; he's a drunkard. He's a friend of the lowlifes, the tax collectors, the sinners." Foolish words about Jesus.

Now, the Christian is a follower of Jesus. That's what we are as Christians. We're followers of Jesus, and as such, we are always to be a bit confusing to those who are in power. Unable to be used. For some, it might seem a bit too strict for their liking, a little goody two-shoes, a bit too moralistic for their tastes. And for others, we might seem a bit too loose with our resources, a bit too gullible when it comes to the poor, a bit too forgiving of those who are notorious sinners, a bit too weak, a bit too committed, a little too serious about this Jesus. There will always be a certain pressure for us as Christians to play the game. As a pastor, I'm invited by the government to play the game all the time. I am asked, not infrequently, to serve as their mouthpiece to you all, to a congregation. "Please tell your congregation this." Okay. No. But I am requested to do that. As long as I fill my role as a leader of a not-for-profit organization, all is good. Christians are useful to politicians if you can be counted on to vote in a certain way, just because someone says this or that. Christians are useful to others if we will give our money to good causes and good things and remain nice but just refrain from talking about all the Jesus stuff. You see, you're irritating when you refuse to play the game.

I'm going to give you a little bit of a hot take. I think it's amazing to have John there and instead simply follow Jesus at whatever the cost, which sometimes might get you

 in trouble with the authorities. It certainly did them and will make you a confusing set of people to most of your coworkers, to many of your neighbors, and to your friends. It's confusing when you just don't act like... And many words will be said and have been said, foolish words about Jesus and about his people, about the church. Jesus says that the world will hate you because it hated him, and the world will never be happy with you. Many will tell us what Christians ought to do, what they ought not to do, like children playing a game and calling on us to play and then getting upset because we won't play the way that they want. But the Christian must not let the Gospel ever be lost in an effort to keep the world from being upset with us. The question will always be for the Christian, not "What does the world want me to play?" but the question for the Christian is, "What does the Lord call me to do in this or that situation?" That's our question always. What does the Lord call me to do? Not what game is being played, what does the Lord call me to do in this or that situation?

Well, Jesus ends his comments about children playing and foolish words with a statement about wisdom. And this, he says, "Yet wisdom is justified by her deeds." Last night, right before it got dark, we put up this big trellis in our garden, a tall trellis, and Naomi planted peas on both sides of this trellis. Now, when you plant peas, you're putting a pea-like seed, which is a pea, into the ground. And nothing would suggest that, in that act, a trellis of the size that we put up is required. And yet, in a little while, with proper care, the peas will grow all over that trellis. Every wise deed, Jesus is saying essentially, is like a planted pea. Every action done in Jesus' name and for his glory will need a trellis. Jesus says it like this: wisdom is justified by her deeds.

There are wise deeds being done here, and they are going to grow. It's going to justify all. You're going to see that this is the right way. First with John's deeds. What are the wise deeds that John did? Well, John was a messenger. It says it here in the text: "Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you." John's deeds consisted mostly in preparing the way for Jesus to come through the preaching and through baptizing. The nature of John's message was repent. Repent. Confess your sins with a humble heart. Turn away from evil deeds and ways and turn towards God. Pursue his holiness. It was an urgent message that he was preaching because he said the kingdom of God is close at hand. It's here because the King was there. John's message was wise because it sought to drive people to fear the Lord, which the Scripture says is the beginning of wisdom. John's deeds were wise because he was faithfully fulfilling his role in salvation history, doing exactly what the Lord called him to do. Wisdom is justified by her deeds. John's deeds would bear great fruit. People would look to Christ because of his deeds. And John's deeds and his life are still being spoken about today. John himself is held in the highest regard by followers of Christ because of his faithful work as a messenger who prepared the way for Jesus.

And then there's the wise deeds of Jesus himself. Jesus' life, as he said, was lived totally out in the open. He showed compassion for lost people. He ate with tax collectors and sinners. He didn't act, I mean, it's amazing, he didn't act as if he was above everybody else in the room, even though he was, in fact, above. He's like maybe the only person who's ever really in that situation. He actually was better than everybody else in the room. But he never acted as if "I'm above you. You're not important. You're nothing." Jesus' deeds include the blind receiving their sight, the lame walking, lepers being cleansed, deaf people hearing, dead people being raised, the poor having good news preached to them. Jesus' deeds included his teaching on every subject, I mean, on tons of subjects in a way that demonstrated authority. Jesus' deeds included miracles like the calming of the sea. Jesus' deeds included resolutely setting his face to the cross and his being delivered into the hands of sinful men and being crucified. Jesus' deeds included his resurrection, his ascension to heaven, and his pouring out of the Spirit on his people. Jesus submitted himself to the Father in all things, and he lived a perfect life of obedience to God's law, to the wisdom of God. Jesus was the very personification of wisdom. There's never been a life more full of wisdom than Christ's. And wisdom is justified by her deeds. You see, say what they want. They're calling him a drunkard. The foolish words are, he's a drunkard and he's a glutton. The planted wisdom changed the world. The world was changed by Christ. Salvation has been accomplished. Hearts have been changed. Blessings have been poured out. The love of God has been multiplied endless numbers of times through the love his church has shown towards other people. And this is because Jesus was faithful to his call versus playing some sort of game that that generation wanted him to play.

You know, Christ calls us away from any foolish game that the world would want you to play to follow him. He goes so far as to say that the wise man is the one who builds his life on Jesus' words. And that when the storms come, the house that is built on Christ will stand. And so this is wisdom, to live for Christ, planting peas every day, doing things as Christ would call you to do. It doesn't matter how little it seems to you. It certainly doesn't matter whether it is something which the world would approve of or not. Wisdom is justified by her deeds. All deeds done for Christ and his glory will bear fruit. It will likely not be immediately, but it definitely will be the case that good fruit will be borne by living for Christ. The man or woman or child who follows this wise path can expect the blessings of knowing the Lord, can expect to bear the fruits of love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, self-control fruits, which will not only be for their own personal benefit but for the benefit of everybody that they know and come into contact with. Those who follow Jesus will ultimately be justified in the resurrection when faith becomes sight and eternal life and glory are right there, and all sin, pain, and suffering comes to an end. Wisdom following Jesus will be justified by her deeds. Jesus challenges the generation's foolish words and reminds us how wise deeds will bear good fruit, and he calls us here in this text also to have open ears.

I've mentioned before from the pulpit this commercial from a long time ago, and in this version, there are these loud noises. They're in a crowded airport, and there's just noise everywhere. It's very loud, and then the camera focuses in on two businessmen who are picking up their bags, and they're in suits. And one says to the other, "You know, my broker says," and he gives him this investment strategy. And he says, "So what does your broker say?" And the other man looks at him and says, "Well, my broker is EF Hutton, and EF Hutton says," and then everything just goes totally silent, and everyone in the entire baggage claim area sort of leans in to hear. And then the commercial voice comes on and says, "When EF Hutton talks, people listen." It's actually maybe the best picture of what Jesus is talking about. When Jesus talks, people ought to listen. They ought to have open ears. The noise, the din of the world, everything that would distract ought to be set aside. Jesus says, "Listen to John." He references something back in Malachi where Malachi says that before the Christ will come, Elijah will come again, essentially, and will proclaim that the Christ has come. And so Jesus says, "Look, if you'll hear, John is the Elijah who is to come. He's pointing to me." Jesus says if you listen to him, you should listen to him because there's never been a greater man born of woman than John. He's the greatest guy ever. So you should listen to what he has to say. And then he says, "Look, and the least in the kingdom of heaven is going to be even greater than John." Because whereas John sent his disciples to ask Jesus if he really was the Christ, it would soon be the case where Jesus would reveal himself in such a way that his disciples wouldn't have to wonder about it. When you see the resurrected Jesus, you're not asking, "Is he the Christ?" You know. His death and resurrection, ascension, the presence of the Holy Spirit would provide every believer with a confidence that even John couldn't have known. But John got us started. John preached a message that everyone needs to hear. It was the message of repentance and the pointing to Jesus.

Jesus points out. He says, "Look, you didn't go out into the wilderness to hear some softy, bringing a soft message that you could hear in a king's palace, or you didn't go out to listen to somebody who was just easily manipulated by the world, somebody who was just weak like a, what is he saying, like a reed shaken by the wind." He says, "Why did you go out to see? You went out to see a prophet, and he is a prophet. So you ought to listen to him. And this is what he's saying. He's saying, Jesus says, what he's saying is, 'I'm the Christ. You need to listen to me.' Now coming from anybody else, of course, that's crazy. Coming from Jesus, that's Jesus

." What's he saying? What does Jesus say? Well, here in this place, he says many things in the Gospels, but here in this place, he says, "Well, this is what you can count on. The kingdom is suffering violence. Violent men are against John and Jesus and all who are a part of his kingdom. John would be beheaded. Jesus would be crucified. Each of the apostles, in his turn, would be imprisoned, beaten, killed. Jesus says that. He says, "Following me will be an invitation to violence." Because you can't play the game. Elsewhere though, Jesus says things like this: "I am the bread of life. I am the light of the world. I am the gate, the way to live. I am the good shepherd. I will watch over my sheep. I am the resurrection, the life. Life in me is life itself. If you follow me, you will live forever. You'll have eternity in your grasp. I am the way and the truth and the life. I am the true vine, and you're the branches. Abide in me, and I will abide in you." Jesus says these things. Do we listen? He says this: he says that he will be the judge of all mankind. One day, we will stand before, actually will bow before Jesus. Every knee will bow. He speaks of his relationship with his Father in heaven as unbreakable, as intimate, describing as his eye and the Father are one. He says many other things contained in the pages of Scripture. When Jesus speaks, do we listen? You see, what Jesus says here is, "He who has ears to hear, let him hear." We need open ears. We are never called to have an open mind. We are called to have open ears. We listen to what Jesus has to say to us. When Jesus talks, we listen. We can't come to Christ, though, expecting soft platitudes, chicken soup for the soul, all of that kind of business. But just like the crowds who initially sought John in the desert, we come to Christ seeking something much better and much greater and much deeper than easy tips for living our lives. We recognize that fundamentally, at the heart, we have a problem. We're not the people that we want to be. We see that we're sinners. We see that we're lost. We see that we are desperately needy, that we're broken, that we're problematic. We understand that. And so we've come seeking the truth. And the truth isn't soft. The truth isn't out there in the world. That's why you can't play the game. Because playing the game gives all the game's answers, which are nothing answers. They give us nothing. And so instead, we go to Jesus. We say, "Speak to us the truth. I don't care how hard it is. Tell me the truth. Please tell me the truth." The person with open ears knows truth isn't soft in dealing with lying. But it's the truth.

So here is some of the truth from Scripture. First, hear the truth of the Scripture. In Christ alone is life and salvation. And so, friends, you need to become a Christian. You do that by confessing your sin, acknowledging that you're not the person that you ought to be, that you've broken God's law, that you deserve whatever justice He sort of has for you. We confess your sins that we then believe the Gospel, that Christ came and died for your sins and took the penalty on Himself. And that believing that Gospel and confessing our sins, we just trust in Him for our life, the things that He says are true. And then, as Christians, we must hear the truth about what the Scriptures promised that the Christian life is going to be like and never be surprised. First, we ought to understand that the Christian life is the most blessed life there is. It's the most blessed because God's present with you, and He's forgiven you your sin. And He's given you life, and He's adopted you as His children. He loves you. He cares for you. He will shepherd you. He will hold on to you. Nothing can ever separate you from His love. Like that's the life of the Christian. It's the most blessed life. It's also the most fruitful life. Instead of a life that generally shrinks, the life of playing the game that will shrink and become smaller and smaller, the life of the Christian expands. The fruit becomes more evident. You look back at your life, and you see that the Lord has been good to you. You see the fruits of living a faithful Christian life. You see that those wise deeds planted as peas have grown onto a trellis. It's a fruitful life that expands, and it's also a difficult life. The Bible says that you're in a war, that your enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil, seek to destroy you. And there is, as Jesus said to us today, violence. There's a good possibility that you will suffer. It will be, at times, difficult to be a Christian. Blessed, fruitful, difficult, it's the Christian life. And yet, there's great comfort in this life. And here, I want to just close with this truth that's drawn from the Scripture concerning the comfort of the Gospel in life and in death. And here, friends, is the Christian's comfort, that you are not your own but belong body and soul in life and in death to our faithful Savior, Jesus Christ. He has fully paid for all of our sins with His precious blood. He set us free from the tyranny of the devil. He watches over us in such a way that not a hair can fall from your head without the will of your Father in heaven. In fact, all things must work together for your salvation. And because you belong to Him, Christ, by His Holy Spirit, assures you of eternal life and makes us wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for Him. There's nothing soft about Jesus, nothing soft about the truth. May we hear that truth, though, with open ears. May we listen to Jesus. May we live according to His ways, a life of wisdom, even if the whole world wants us to live a different way. And in all things, may Christ be glorified. Let's pray.

Father in heaven, give us open ears that we may hear the truth of your word and follow after Jesus with our whole heart, mind, soul, and strength. Encourage us when foolish words are spoken against us as your people. Help us to live wisely before a watching world, always pointing others to Jesus. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray these things. Amen.