# 2025-03-16 Living Hope Presbyterian Church

## The Second Coming of the King

We declare together the basic facts that all true Christians believe. And one of those facts is that Jesus Christ is coming to judge the living and the dead. This return of the Lord Jesus is what Christians call the second coming. That Christ came the first time, born of Mary, lived and ministered among the people of Israel, was crucified, rose again from the dead, and after a short while, Jesus ascended into heaven, where even today he is reigning as king. But one day he's going to come again to judge the living and the dead. That's the second coming. Now this is taught in many places in the Bible and today's scripture text in the Gospel of Matthew is one of those places.

And in our walk through that gospel together as a congregation, we're actually, we're in the middle, nearing the pivot conversation. Matthew records for us that Jesus is having with his disciples. And we've looked carefully at Jesus's words over the last two weeks and have seen a few emphases with respect to this second coming of Christ. We've seen that it will be sudden. No one will know the day or the hour. We've seen that it will be visible. There will be no mistaking it, that it will be personal. Each person in this room will see Jesus. And it will be a time of division. There will be those who are welcomed into the kingdom of God and those who are not. And what we do, we've seen with the talents and the life that we've been given. It all matters. Our works will be judged.

Last week we also considered that how one sees the judge is pretty important. The one man we remember from last week who was cast out from the Master's presence, he saw the Master as hard and cruel, almost a thief that would use others for his own purposes. And those who were honored by the Master saw him completely differently. They saw him as the giver of good gifts. They wanted to enter into his joy. They wanted to be good and faithful servants. And today, as we finish the consideration of the second Coming, Jesus will tell us about the final judgment that will occur of all mankind. So important for us to hear. Hear the word of the Lord.

Matthew 25, beginning at verse 31. When the Son of Man comes in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. Before him will be gathered all the nations. And he will separate people one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. And he will place the sheep on his right, but the goats on the left. Then the King will say to those on his right, "Come, you are blessed by my Father. Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was hungry and you gave me food, and I was thirsty and you gave me drink. I was a stranger and you welcomed me. I was naked and you clothed me. I was sick and you visited me. I was in prison and you came to me."

Then the righteous will answer him, saying, "Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you or thirsty and give you a drink? And when did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you? And when did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?" And the King will answer them, "Truly I say to you, as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me."

And then he will say to those on his left, "Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire that is prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was hungry and you gave me no food. I was thirsty and you gave me no drink. I was a stranger and you did not welcome me naked, and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison, and you did not visit me." Then they also will answer, saying, "Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger, or naked, or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?" And then he will answer them, saying, "Truly I say to you, as you did not do it to one of the least of these, you did not do it to me." And these will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life. This is the word of the Lord.

This morning the King comes. When the Son of Man, Jesus begins, comes in his glory and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. The question with respect to Jesus coming again is, is not a question of if, it's a question of when. We are reminded of that here, although no one knows the day and the hour, there will be a day and an hour when the Son of Man comes in his glory. What is clear too is that Jesus, when He returns, he will return in glory. It will not be secret. It will not be a return in humiliation as a baby in a manger for whom there was no room in the inn. It will not be with the same purpose, because salvation has already been accomplished. It will be at the time of the Father's choosing. And Jesus glory will break in on all of mankind.

Part of his coming in this way, we learn just from that very first verse, is that he will not be alone. The angels will come with Him. You'll remember the story of his first coming. And the shepherds who were in the fields watching their flocks by night, and they experienced a local, very local manifestation of this glory. It says that the angel of the Lord appeared to them and the glory of the Lord shone all around them. And they were filled with great fear. Jesus will be accompanied by angels. The glory will not be local, the glory will be universal. This picture of light shining in the darkness, of a brilliance, a magnificence, a splendor, a majesty, weightiness, power. It's all here in this phrase. This is what it's going to be like when the Son of Man comes in his glory.

We've learned over the last couple weeks the importance of being about the work that the Lord calls us to do each day. That when he returns in glory, if he were to return, that he might today, that he might find us fulfilling our various callings in life, that he might find us applying our gifts for the glory of God and the good of other people. Everything that we do is for his glory. And so the message has been that it's important what we do, what we're doing this morning. We're doing what the Lord calls us to do. We've gathered together for worship on Tuesday here. There were a hundred or so men by the time they had all gathered together singing Guide Me, O Thou Great Jehovah. And at the very end of our meeting, singing the Doxology, praise God, from Whom all blessings flow. And it was stirring. And I imagine what a joy it would be to be singing together like this in this place when the Lord in all his glory comes. But may we be rejoicing, people, when the King of glory comes and when Jesus returns, he's going to come to judge.

In our court system, I've been there more than anybody would want to be recently. But in our court system, when the judge enters the room, what do all the people do? They rise up. The judge is there. And when the judge sits, all are able to sit. The judge comes and the people respond to the judge. And that's just in some earthly district court, there's at least a sense of, like an honor of an earthly judge who could be fallible as anything and is. But that honor and that respect is sort of given in that way. Imagine what it will be like on the last and great day. Whether a man or a woman stands in song or bows in worship at the coming of the king, the judge, or if he or she doesn't know Christ and is cowering in fear, the Judge will come, and he will sit on his glorious throne.

And he comes to judge the nations. Isaiah reminds us, he says, "I know their works, I know the works of the wicked, that their thoughts." And the time is coming. The Lord said through Isaiah, "The time is coming when I will gather all the nations and all the tongues. They shall come and they will see my glory." Here we are at the end. All nations are gathered. There is Christ on his throne. All people, all time, all nations. There's no hiding from the judge. There's no trying to get a delay so that you can get your act together and your paperwork done. You're there before the judge. All of our thoughts, all of our words, all of our deeds open before him. That's the picture. All the nations and there we are.

And Jesus goes on as he's talking about this to say that the King will then separate people one from another. He will separate them. Now, at some point in one's mathematics education, they will inevitably have to do probability. And you know the problems, those very important problems where there's three red balls and three green balls and five blue balls, and you have to figure out what's the possibility of pulling out one blue ball, and then after that, one green ball. And it drives everybody crazy. There's so many possibilities, so many combinations. And we can see, even sometimes as Christians, we can see people kind of in that way. There are Christians and then there are like, obviously non Christians, and then there are people who are almost there. And there are the agnostic types and there are the angry atheist types, and there's nice neighbors who were not quite sure if they're Christian or not, because sometimes they pop in the church and sometimes they don't.

But in the final judgment, you know, the last separation, there are only two groups. There aren't three, there aren't five, there aren't ten. There's two groups. The sheep and the goats is the picture Jesus draws. So I want to consider some things we see here in this text about these two groups.

First, I would say is that there is no confusion as to which group one belongs to. The picture is not of everybody scurrying around to see which group they're a part of. The picture is that there's sheep and there's goats, and Jesus just separates the two. The sheep are very well aware of the fact that they're sheep, and the goats are aware of the fact that they're goats. The sheep are placed on the right hand and that's the place, of course, of honor in the Bible, the right hand, and the goats are placed at the left hand. The question is just frank, for all of us to consider. Am I a follower of Jesus or am I not? That's the division that Jesus is drawing. Am I a sheep or am I a goat?

Second, what we can see is that the separation is based on identity. Sheep or goat. A sheep ends up doing sheep things and a goat ends up doing goat things. But identity is always first. The works are secondary, but the identity is first. And that should be noted because this passage sometimes causes people a great deal of anxiety when maybe Jesus would have us doing something besides being anxious. It should be noted this passage does not teach that you are saved by your works. You are saved by grace, through faith in Christ alone, by being adopted into the family of God as a son or a daughter, or in this picture as a sheep, you have been made aware by God's grace of your need. You have cried out to him. You have repented of your sins, you've received his forgiveness and you're following after him.

The sheep by grace, the goats in this image have no real relationship with God. Jesus doesn't know them. He doesn't relate to them in the same way that he does with the sheep. The sheep know him, they love him, the goats don't. They've sadly remained outside of the salvation that's freely offered in the gospel. Saying that because I want you to be able to read this and understand that if you are a Christian, you are a sheep in this picture and you can hear it correctly. If you're a Christian, you are a sheep. That's your identity. And if you're not, you're a goat. That's your identity. If you are a goat, there is still time this morning to embrace the gospel and become one of Jesus own. Sheep or goat identity comes first. He doesn't look and see what everybody's doing and saying, "Okay, well then I will appoint you a sheep." And "You would go," he just gathers the sheep, gathers the goats, and he says, "You're over there now."

Third, as sheep, it's important for us to see that we are united to Christ. This passage teaches this. "Truly, I say to you," Jesus says, "as you did it to one of the least of my brothers, you did it to me." That is a very strong statement. Jesus going to touch on it a little bit later about how surprising it is. But "Truly I say to you, as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me." When he goes through the list of you know, "I was hungry, I was thirsty, I was in prison, I was sick." When he goes through the list, he's not speaking of all of the poor people or all of the hungry or thirsty people in the world or those who are in prison or those who are beaten down, the naked. It's not that we shouldn't care for those who are in those categories. It's just that's not who Jesus is talking about here. He's not talking that generally. And he's also not talking when he says "these my brothers," he's not just pointing to the 12 apostles. In other words, he's not particularly restrictive either.

When he's speaking of his brothers and he's looking around the least of these brothers here, he's looking at the sheep. He's saying all of these followers of Christ, the church, now on a side, we can see that the truth, what that means is that if you're united to Christ, if you're one of his sheep, there are some very real problems, probabilities in your life that is that you might suffer. I mean, what, what's, what's Jesus? What kind of works are the people doing that Jesus is acknowledging? He says, "You're, you're feeding those who are hungry. You're giving something to drink to those who are thirsty. And there are those who are in jail, and there are those who are being beaten down. There are those who are suffering." I mean, the early Christians face, like most of the men sitting in that private conversation that Jesus has, most of them are going to suffer and die at the hands of others. Many of them are going to spend a lot of time in jail. Jesus is talking very practically here.

The early Christians face this. And there are Christians throughout the world today who face everything that is mentioned here. They face jail for their faith. They face hunger, poverty and so on. And Jesus points out that because of our union with him, what happens to us, what happens to believers happens to him. You might remember the situation with the Apostle Saul. Well, Paul, before he became Paul, he was Saul, he hated Christian people. He was responsible for killing Christians, which pretty much should open up anybody who you think, "Oh, that person could never become a Christian," and you should sort of probably just get rid of that. Here is somebody who was killing them, okay? And he's on the road to Damascus where he's going to persecute the Christians some more. And it says that the glory of the Lord surrounded Paul, blinding him. And he hears his voice. "Saul, why are you persecuting me?" Saul asks, "Who's talking," and he hears this. "I'm Jesus whom you are persecuting."

When a person persecutes a Christian, he's persecuting Jesus. Likewise, love for one another as Christians expressed, as we see here in hospitality and compassion and generosity, love expressed for Christians is expressing love for Christ. That's how it's done. You know, just as a side note, it appears to be that the most surprising thing that happens in this text on the final judgment through for both the sheep and the goats, or not, like, all of a sudden the goats are like, "Oh, no, we didn't think about where this might end up for us," right? Because some of them probably had been told. But the most surprising thing for both the sheep and the goats is the closeness of the connection between Jesus and his people. "When did we do this for you? When did we." The Christians are asking this, "When did we feed you? When did we clothe you? When did we visit you in jail?" They're shocked by the closeness of the connection.

I think we can be still shocked by that today. I mean, when you're sitting next to somebody who's a believer, you tend not to say, you know, "Whatever I do to this person, I'm doing to Jesus." But Jesus is saying, that comes with two things, right? It means that person sitting next to you is a believer is so incredibly precious to God. So we ought to be really understanding that in the way that we treat one another. Like, we need to understand that this person is precious to God. So much so that Jesus would connect himself with this person, would say, "If you do this person, if you're kind to this person, you're kind to me. But if you're cruel to this person, you're cruel to me." You see? But in addition to that, just how we see one another, this is also a picture of what that means about you. Jesus is willing even in the midst of you being a person who I know, you know, you know, like, you know your failings, you know your sinfulness, you know these things as a Christian, you know, you don't do the things you wish you were would do. And, and you, and you do things you wish you hadn't, and you repent of all of that. And you, you feel like a mess. And you feel like, "Why? How can God use me?" And what Jesus is saying, "Stop asking all those stupid questions because I will connect myself to you. Like, I love you so much. You're mine. That's what matters. That's what matters." He cherishes you like that.

I wonder when we get to this point in our life, because all of us will be there. I wonder if one of the most beautiful parts of that experience will be when the Lord reveals to us how some small kindness that you have long since forgotten. "Remember when you said that encouraging word to you? Remember when you helped that person who was just really struggling or was sick or you sat that extra five hours beyond what you. You had the capacity to sit. You weren't sitting five hours with your sick relative. You were sitting for five hours." I wonder how many glorious surprises we're going to receive on that day that are just going to make us happy and make us see things like they really are. So anyway, there's this beautiful part of being united to Christ that becomes very clear in this passage.

But fourth, just as beautiful, there is this terror that's described. There is the terror of the goats. The goats are characterized as those who were cursed, who were not of Christ, but actually of the devil. So they're told to depart, that they would receive eternal punishment, the eternal fire that had been prepared for the devil and his angels. I mean, this is the strongest language. Sheep and goats. People have hurt you. I'm sure you've hurt people. One of the things that we should desire for no person, no matter how bad they've damaged us, is that picture.

Brothers and sisters, the Lord has called us as Christians to be those who speak and live out the gospel before the world. This picture, Jesus's painting of the final judgment is not so that we should worry that we're not doing enough to be classified as sheep and spend our whole lives like that. It's a picture that should drive us to be honest with the lost and the dying, to share the gospel. The finality and the terror of this judgment is real. Our love for others should compel us to be willing when God gives the opportunity to be just, open and honest.

Fifth, we see that the works of the sheep and the goats will be judged. The Apostle Paul says it like this. "We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ so that each one may receive what's due for what he's done in the body, whether good or evil." The preacher in the book of Ecclesiastes says it like this. "For God will bring every deed into judgment with every secret thing, whether good or evil." You know, there's nothing you can hold back. Everything.

Now we learned last week that works are important. We'll be judged in this way. We're called to be active in this world. Our works are always to match our faith. And yet the Christian is not trying to earn salvation by doing good works, but rather as a saved person. You're always seeking to do good to everyone, especially to those who are of the household of faith, as Paul says. And we see this here in this passage. We see hospitality is essential, compassion is essential, generosity is essential. If we are Christians, that's what we ought to be. Our works ought to always match our faith, but not because we're crazy, like, "Oh, no, if they don't, God's going to, like, zap me or kick me over to the goat category," but because we love the one who made us a sheep, would do anything for him. As someone who would cherish you like that, who would give his only son to die for you, wouldn't we just want to do the things that he would want us to do.

So your life matters, friends. What you do matters. It all matters. It's actually what will be judged on the last day. He looks at him, he says, "Well, you did this, this, this, this, this." So this passage is a call to action. It's just not anxious action. May we be those, as Christians, who are rich in good works always abounding. May we be known to the world by the good works that we do for one another, for our love for one another. How will we be known as Christians, as belonging to Christ by our love for one another. So may it be so abounding in good works.

Jesus, the king, is going to come again in glory. He's going to sit on his glorious throne. Then he's going to make a separation. He's going to take the sheep, put them to his right. Goats, he's going to put to his left. The judgment's declared, the sentence against the wicked, the goats, is final and it's eternal. There it is. It's terrible. Final and eternal.

But what are the sheep? What will you hear as a sheep, as a Christian, at the final judgment? Well, we're going to hear an invitation. And the invitation is one, first of all, of grace. "Come," he says. The king will say to those who are on his right. This is what you will hear, Christian, "Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." This is, in a way, the other side of last week's statement, "Well done, good and faithful servant." Here is Jesus calling his sheep blessed by the Father and saying that the kingdom that they were about to inherit had actually been prepared for them from the foundation of the world. Before they could even do any works, he had already prepared. He already prepared their inheritance for them. God's grace had set this all in motion.

It's at the heart of the Gospel, to the heart of Paul's message to the Ephesians. Now listen. It's a little bit of a longer passage, but I want you to hear it. Because he's saying this. Paul says, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Because he's blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places. He chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love. He predestined us for adoption to Himself as sons through Jesus Christ according to the purpose of his will. Here we go. To the praise of his glorious grace. You see, we had nothing to do with any of this. To the praise of his glorious grace with which he's blessed us in the Beloved, in fact, in him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of trespasses according to the riches of his grace which he's lavished upon us in all wisdom and in insight, making known to us the mystery of his will according to his purpose, which he set forth in Christ as a plan for the fullness of time to unite all things in Him. Things in heaven, things in earth."

You're like, it's like this. There's this marvelous grand plan. It's like so far outside of you and me and any little thing that we could kind of like come up with. And it's all God's grace, like before the foundation of the world. It says that he chose you and he prepared an inheritance for you. That's where he goes on. He says, "In him we've obtained an inheritance having been predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his will, so that we who were the first to hope in Christ might be to the praise of his glory in Him. You also, when you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, that's when you believed. You believed in Him. You were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit. Who's the guarantee of your inheritance."

God does everything with the foundation of the book series of things. Maybe you're here today and this is like the time Paul says, the pain. Eyes open. You realize everything has been done for me. And I didn't do anything. I've been given everything. It's all a gift. And it's all a gift that cost Jesus his life, his blood shed for you. Everything is a gift. Salvation isn't earned. The Father blessed us, chose us, predestined us to become sons and daughters, to inherit a kingdom. And the basis of his doing this was grace. Why did God do it? Because that's what he's like. That's it. There's no other answer. It's just God's grace. He's like that.

And the invitation to the sheep is also one of joy. Last week we talked about this at length. "Enter into the joy of your master." Stop for just a moment. Consider that again. The joy of your master. That's what he's bringing you into. Joy of being in the Lord's light and glory and kindness and wisdom and generosity and righteousness and holiness and faithfulness. Like everything about the Lord, he's bringing you in grace. And he invites you, "Come, you who are blessed by my Father. Inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of the world. Enter into the joy." This, this is for you.

You see, the invitation to the sheep is also one of relationship here. The King is inviting us to receive our great inheritance. Maybe you've received an inheritance here on earth. Somebody who you loved or maybe didn't love, I don't know. But eventually they died and you got something. You got some stuff, maybe you got some money, maybe you got something that was precious to you, maybe you got some things that you then had to give away. You received some sort of inheritance. But on earth, generally, the requirement is that to receive the inheritance, the person who is the giver has to be dead. So you never enjoy the inheritance with the giver of the inheritance, but not so with the inheritance Jesus is speaking of. This is an inheritance that will be enjoyed with the giver of the inheritance. Isn't that something? Eternal life with him. The blessing of a relationship that is no longer marred by sin or sorrow or death or pain or any of those things, just like the real relationship with your God.

The final invitation to the sheep, fourthly, is that it's the fruit of the first invitation to the sheep. This final invitation, "Come, you who are blessed of my Father. Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." And the final invitation, Jesus says, "Come, come on in." But this is what he said at first too, isn't it? "Come, follow me. I'll make you fishers of men. Come unto me, all you who are weary and heavy laden, and I'll give you rest." You see, it's the fruit of that first invitation. People who receive the first invitation will receive the second invitation, the final invitation.

In fact, that first invitation is the one that we as Christians are called on to issue to others. We're called to tell others about Jesus, as I've mentioned before. Of course we'll want to do that. It's like the story of the woman at the well who returned to her village after meeting with Jesus and said to the people there, "Come and see a man who told me all that I ever did. Can this be the Christ?" May the Lord find us issuing this invitation as we have opportunity.

Friend, Jesus is coming again. He's coming again. And he's coming again in glory. And when he comes in glory, he's going to sit his glorious throne. And John Newton, who we already sang one of his hymns today, Amazing Grace. He wrote another hymn which we're going to sing later, and it describes the scene. He says, "See the judge our nature wearing, clothed in majesty divine. You who long for his appearing there shall say this God is mine, gracious Savior, own me in that day as thine. To those who have confessed, loved and served the Lord below, he will say, 'Come near, ye blessed. See the kingdom that I bestow you forever shall my love and my glory know.'" What a day, what a day that will be.

Let's pray
