# The Return of the King

### Mr. Phillip Pugh

May the words of my mouth and the meditation of our hearts be acceptable in your sight, O Lord our Rock and our Redeemer. Amen.

I really like old folk tales, and there's one I've heard several versions of about a king who was setting out to visit the north of England, and as he was planning his journey, he sent messengers to visit all of the villages along his planned route to prepare for his arrival. And in one village called Goten, the elders of the village heard about it and decided that they didn't want the king coming through, because if he did, they would be expected to put on a show, and not only that, but the road through the village would be now a royal highway, and extra taxes would come with that. So when the king's messengers arrived, they found a strange sight. People attempting to drown fish, men rolling wheels of cheese down the hill so that they would find their way to market, wives attempting to fence the songbirds. In short, the king's men found a scene of people doing insane things, and since madness was supposed to be contagious, they advised the king to avoid this village, and the wise men of Goten became a phrase for people whose foolishness, whose seeming foolishness, masks true wisdom. The wise men of Goten did not want their village to receive the royal visit, because despite the honor, it came at a cost.

When a king visits his realm, there are expectations about what he should find. And if we remember the Isaiah passages that we have been going through during Advent, they speak of longing, longing for a king who will reign in righteousness. But what happens when that king actually shows up? What will he find? And what will he do with what he finds? As we have traveled with Jesus through Matthew, and as we return to Matthew, we have seen these themes throughout. The wisdom of God that looks like foolishness to man. Things like, blessed are the meek, blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are the persecuted, blessed are the gentiles, the tax collectors, the beggars, and sinners. These people show faith, while the rich, the intelligent, the teachers of the law, and the priests all fail to see signs that are right in front of them. And in our passage this morning, those signs become unmistakable as Jesus rides into Jerusalem to cheers and acclamations. The king, the son of David, the promised Messiah, is riding into his capital, but what will he find? And what will he do with what he finds? This is what we will discover as we turn, so turn with me to Matthew chapter 21 verses 1 through 11.

Now when they drew near to Jerusalem and came to Bethphage, to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples saying to them, "Go into the village in front of you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me. If anyone says anything to you, you shall say, 'The Lord needs them,' and he will send them at once." This took place to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet, saying, "Say to the daughter of Zion, 'Behold, your king is coming to you, humble and mounted on a donkey, on a colt, full of beast of burden.'" The disciples went and did as Jesus had directed them. They brought the donkey and the colt and put on them their cloaks, and he sat on them. Most of the crowds spread out their cloaks on the road, and others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road. And the crowds that went before him and that followed him were shouting, "Hosanna to the son of David, blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest." And when he entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred up, saying, "Who is this?" And the crowd said, "This is the prophet Jesus from Nazareth of Galilee." This is the word of the Lord this morning.

The scene that we have here is one that would be familiar to anyone from the ancient world. Kings would receive reports from provinces about what was going on, or governors would send letters, but the best way to really understand what a situation was and what was going on was for the king to come in person. Letters might lie, official reports might obfuscate, but it's a lot harder to hide the true state of affairs from the king or emperor who is there in person to receive the complaints of the local people about how their rulers were managing or mismanaging the province. And so royal and imperial visits were carefully stage managed, both by local governors and dignitaries and other local notables who might want to get rid of their officials. Or at least they wanted leverage to be able to threaten removal. Everything would be choreographed and scripted and preparations would be there so that the ruler would get the best impression possible. Streets lined with cheering crowds, displays of wealth, great banquets, parades of the local garrison, all to honor and flatter the ruler. But it might not be entirely insincere. For example, if a king is entering a reconquered province, a place that had been lost and is now free from foreign occupation, the cheers of the crowd might just be genuine. And the celebrations might just reflect real relief, joy at the reversal of fortune. But even here there could be sour notes. Local nobles who had collaborated with the occupiers might glance nervously at the city gates as they waited to receive a returning ruler. Of course, truly wise kings are always aware of the possibility of insincere flattery. And so a wise king might be said to slip quietly out of the palace to see what's really going on. There's all sorts of stories that circulate of kings and emperors putting on beggars' rags to hear the complaints of their subjects. And then, when they have donned their royal robes, deliver swift justice to oppressive officials. These tales circulated, but most knew that in reality, of course, no king would ever do that. Kings don't just leave their finery to wander incognito through the streets. Or do they? Because in our text this morning, Jesus is doing precisely that. He is riding into Jerusalem to see the state of his kingdom. What has been going on in the absence of the king? Only instead of staying in the shadows, dressed as a beggar, he does it in plain sight, still dressed as a plain peasant, and yet truly the king for those with eyes to see.

As Jesus approaches the great city of Jerusalem, Mount Zion, the place spoken of throughout the Psalms and the Prophets, the city of David, his forefather, he does whatever any great king would do, and he sends messengers ahead to prepare the way for his entrance into the city. The paradox is that this visitation is both a visitation in disguise, like the kings of legend, and also the formal procession that would be expected of a great ruler. And what we see here are the three stages of a traditional ceremonial entrance. First, the king sends heralds ahead of him to prepare the way and announce the coming of the king. And second, there is an acclamation that people receive him and proclaim his kingship and formally recognize it. And finally, when the king enters the city, there is a judgment. He pronounces his will. And in our passage this morning, we are seeing the first two acts of this drama. The first two acts. So we begin with the procession. Jesus is holding a procession. He gives two disciples very clear instructions. Find a young donkey and bring it so that he can ride into his city. Not only that, but like royal heralds, he sends them with royal authority. If anyone says anything to you, you shall say the Lord needs them. He sends them with royal authority. Think about that. You're the owner of this donkey and you see two people, two men, untying the donkey and you say, what is going on? And they say, the Lord has need of it. And you just say, OK. Jesus' authority through these messengers, like actual royal heralds. Once the authority is clear, the objections fall away and permission will be granted. We also see echoes, I think, of Isaiah 40 here. In the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord. Make straight in the desert a highway for our God. Not for the last time, Jesus is sending messengers with his authority to prepare the way and announce his coming. And he comes, when he comes, he comes riding on a donkey's colt. And Matthew here comments the parallels with the prophecy of Zechariah. Say to the daughter of Zion, behold, your king is coming to you humble and mounted on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a beast of burden. Now, many commentators, including John Calvin, have noted that the donkey was an unlikely mount for a king of kings. After all, in English, the proper name of the donkey, the word donkey was invented, I am glad to say, in the 18th century, the proper name of the donkey is considered rude and insulting, hence why we use a euphemism. Because donkeys are stubborn and unteachable. Yet the closer inspection of Zechariah's prophecy reveals something deeper. Yes, there is that incongruity of a king mounted on a donkey rather than a magnificent chariot or a war horse, but Zechariah is recalling a description, a description of Israelite kingship. The donkey, you see, was a symbol of the kings of Israel. In Deuteronomy 17, we learn that the kings of God's people are not to gather horses and chariots. These are the weapons of war, the weapons platforms, the systems that were for great conquests. This is not to be the way of Israel's kings. Instead, it seems, the donkey or the mule was the royal animal in Israel. For instance, in 1 Kings chapter 1, we find Solomon riding a mule in his procession to his coronation. And not just any mule, but his father's mule, the mule of his father David, to signify David's blessing on his accession. And so for those who are watching, these observant Jews, the significance is clear. Jesus, like Solomon, is laying claim to the inheritance of David, which is why we find the crowds addressing him as son of David, the promised Messiah. The humility proclaims Christ as a true heir of David's line.

David came from nothing. What was Bethlehem? Insignificant. Tiny little village. A son of Jesse. Jesse, whose grandmother was the Moabite Ruth, not even an Israelite. And in his own family, David was overlooked. When Samuel came to anoint a new king from the line of Jesse, where was David? Well, he was deemed so insignificant that he could be left out, and he was out tending the flocks. David was overlooked even by Samuel himself. And so as Jesus rides into Jerusalem, his entrance is humble. Humble like David's. And yet, like David, Jesus is coming as the anointed one, Israel's true Messiah, the king. With cloaks of his followers instead of a saddle, on a donkey colt instead of a war horse. With no well-armed soldiers, no companies of legions, or even like Judas Maccabeus, not even a ragtag band of freedom fighters, no, his train, what is it composed of? Fishermen. Women. He's not dressed in purple robes, nor does he wear a golden crown. Instead he rides in the humble homespun of a Galilean peasant. What sort of king is this? Anyone with eyes to see might say, a son of David. Because as he approaches the city, he receives the acclamation of his people. This is the king. The heir of the house of David really is returning to claim his birthright. Yet what they don't know is that this time the kingdom will be different. A kingdom of the poor, the mourners, the meek, the persecuted, the pure, the merciful, the peacemakers. The disciples themselves may not yet understand, and the crowds cheering him certainly don't, but this is still the acclamation of the true king. For what we see, we see the crowd spreading cloaks and palm branches in front of the donkey as Jesus moves toward the great gates of Jerusalem. In many times and places, royalty are treated to having the ground covered in front of them so that they do not have to walk on mere mortal dirt. Even in our culture we speak of the red carpet treatment, dating from a time when there would be red carpets laid down for first class train or ship passengers. So too, the people who have gathered spread their cloaks and palm branches in front of the approaching king. And as he approaches, the crowds shout the formal acclamations, "Hosanna to the son of David, blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest." This is the recognition. This is the king's return.

Once, long ago, Israel had a true king who reigned in justice and power, who was able to conquer the enemies of God, but his line failed. The kings that followed were not righteous like David. Israel was sent into exile and even the return to Jerusalem from exile was a disappointment. Righteous leaders like Joshua the priest and Zerubbabel the governor could not restore what had been lost. The line of kings was broken. The new temple was a shadow of the old and Judea was reduced to being a small province of larger empires. But here, here is a true king. The heir of David and Solomon entering his capital in triumph. Soon the crowds think he will deal with all those who have had us under their thumb. He will restore Israel's former glory. Let him enter in triumph and ascend the throne, enter the temple and soon everything will be right. Like Peter in chapter 16, they think they know the plot. It's after all the return of the king. And thus the honor and the acclamation. Here is a true son of David riding on a donkey's colt, receiving the acclamation of the people of Israel, just like in 1 Kings chapter 1. So Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada and the Cherithites and the Pelethites went down and had Solomon ride on King David's mule and brought him to Gihon. There Zadok the priest took the horn of oil from the tent and anointed Solomon. Then they blew the trumpet and all the people said, "Long live King Solomon." And all the people went up after him playing on pipes and rejoicing with great joy so that the earth was split by their noise. Like the wise men back in Matthew 1, the crowds see the signs of Jesus' kingship. They see it clearly when the teachers of the law, the great scholars, do not. Like Solomon, Jesus comes riding on a donkey. Like Solomon, Jesus was anointed when the Holy Spirit descended upon him at baptism. And like Solomon, he is acclaimed by the people of Jerusalem as he rides into the city. This is what the coronation of a son of David is supposed to look like. The king may be humble and his appearance may not be all that impressive, yet the crowds see the signs. The humility is a sign. The royal descendant, long hidden, now rides in mounted on the beast of humble royalty. His followers may be a ragtag motley crew, but so were David's mighty men. This king may not look like much, but neither did David. If you're familiar with the accounts of the old kingdom, you understand. Here is the new son of David, the new Solomon. The shoot from the stump of Jesse has sprouted, and now that shoot is bearing fruit. But if you're reading carefully, if you read on from 1 Kings 1 to 1 Kings 2, then you know what comes next. Righteous judgment. When Solomon became king, his father David gave him an agenda. Unfinished business. A list of priorities that needed to be attended to. Specifically, Solomon was instructed by David to execute righteous judgment on the leaders of Israel. To kill unrighteous officials and remove unrighteous priests. And so as we follow Jesus through the gates of Jerusalem, we are faced with a question. What kind of king is this? And what sort of judgment will he be bringing? The crowds who acclaim Jesus are going to be disappointed rather badly. For Jesus is not here to lead an army against the Romans. He is not here to enthrone himself and rearrange the politics of Jerusalem. Jesus is here for an inspection. For the same reason that Augustus or any earthly emperor would visit a town. Jesus is here for the audit. He is here to see whether his commands are really being followed. He is here to pronounce judgment. And yes, Jesus is going to be judging the nations starting with Israel. Starting with the household of God. And as the crowd grows, people start to ask what's going on? Who is this that we are acclaiming? The answer is, this is the prophet Jesus from Nazareth of Galilee. But this recognition of the prophetic ministry of Jesus should also be a warning to the crowds. I mean, when do prophets show up? Do prophets generally show up when things are going well? When the will of God is being followed? No. If we read our Old Testament, prophets usually appear at the times when the kings and the priests are corrupt. And when repentance is the only way to escape the wrath of God for sin. Take Isaiah for instance. We often associate Isaiah with messages of hope and peace. And yet, Isaiah was sent to an unrighteous king, King Ahaz. And he was told, your message will fall on deaf ears. Ahaz desecrated the temple. Ahaz failed to adhere to God's commands and Isaiah was sent to warn him. Warn him with a message of judgment. Or take Elijah. Elijah was sent to King Ahad to pronounce famine on the land and call down fire from heaven in punishment for idolatry. So if these crowds, if they are recognizing Jesus as a prophet, then they should be wondering, how will we be judged? As Jesus goes up to the temple, as he is being acclaimed as king and recognized as a prophet, what is he going to find when he enters? Will he find righteous priests and faithful teachers of the law? Will he see that the sacrifices are being performed in accordance with the law? Will he find justice and equity and peace and harmony among God's people? Or will he find something else? Injustice, corruption, greed, hypocrisy, false worship, formalism. When Israel is judged, will any be found righteous? This is the question we're going to see throughout the next few chapters of Matthew. Will any be found righteous? The people have acclaimed their king. They have seen through the humble appearances to the reality that this is a true prophet. This is a true king. And maybe they anticipate that he will set things right, do justice, and maybe do a little rearranging of the order of things. But what the crowds and even the disciples fail to realize is that Jesus is here to judge Israel itself. To test whether there is a true righteous Israelite left. All Israel is about to be judged. The priests, the teachers of the law, the scribes, the Pharisees, the Sadducees, the Herodians, the Zealots, the Essenes, the nobles, the crowds themselves. All of them are before the judgment seat of the true king to be assessed. The king has indeed returned. And the king is headed to the temple to the seat of judgment. And the next few chapters of Matthew are concerned with what this judgment is going to look like. Even as the people question Jesus, as the various representatives come and ask Jesus questions, Jesus is in turn questioning them. And revealing their hearts. Because all Israel is about to be judged, and it will turn out that there is indeed a true Israelite. Jesus himself. All Israel will be judged and found wanting except for the true Israelite. The righteous king of an unrighteous people. A righteous king and a righteous priest and a righteous prophet who will give his life for them. We all know the story. It's not a surprise to us. We know what's coming. And we've heard it many times before. But if we've been paying attention during Advent in the Christmas season, we know that this judgment that Jesus is bringing in our passage today is not merely for those people back then. Jesus suffered, he died, he rose again from the dead and ascended to heaven as we confess every week in the creed. But we also confess that he will return as the judge of both the living and the dead. We read in Revelation chapter 19 of a very different triumphal entry.

"Then I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse! The one sitting on it is called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he judges and makes war. His eyes are like a flame of fire, and on his head are many diadems, and he has a name written that no one knows but himself. He is clothed in a robe dipped in blood, and the name by which he is called is The Word of God. And the armies of heaven, arrayed in fine linen, white and pure, are following him on white horses. From his mouth comes a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations, and he will rule them with a rod of iron. He will tread the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty. On his robe and on his thigh he has a name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords."

Here is Jesus the King once again. No longer mounted on a mere donkey but on a pure white horse. Following him is the same ragtag band of followers that we see in our passage only this time they are washed and they are pure. Because of the blood of the lamb and they are arrayed as a mighty army. Here is a king who no longer enters in disguise but in the glory that everyone can recognize. And as on Palm Sunday Jesus is coming with the same purpose. To judge the earth and rule with righteousness and justice. And so the question for us this morning is the same as the question for the crowds on that Sunday morning 2000 years ago. When the king returns what will he find? Will he find faithful people following his law and blessing the nations like Israel was supposed to do? Or will he find scandal, schism, backbiting, immorality, greed and power seeking in the household of God? And if we are honest with ourselves we aren't all that different from the crowds of Jesus' day. We look at our own churches and our own hearts and we see all the same sins that they had right there. It's easy reading over this to feel smug and think the disciples were just dumb and the Pharisees felt self important and the crowds were easily swayed. It's easy until we start examining our own lives and realize that all of those sins, those sins that are so easy to see in the pages of scripture are still with us. We have not loved God wholeheartedly and we have not loved our neighbors as ourselves. We have sinned and thought, were in deed and there is no health in us. And yet, and yet despite this, there is good news. It's true as John writes in his first epistle, "If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us." But then he goes on to say this, "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world." That King who is coming to judge is also our advocate before the throne of judgment. If we put our trust in Christ, if we confess our sins before him then we know that he has taken away our sin before him. This is what Isaiah discovered on the day when he saw the Lord enthroned with the Seraphim chanting their eternal song. "I said, 'Woe is me! For I am lost; for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts!' Then one of the seraphim flew to me, having in his hand a burning coal that he had taken with tongs from the altar. And he touched my mouth and said: 'Behold, this has touched your lips; your guilt is taken away, and your sin atoned for.'" Like Isaiah we have seen the King and we will see the King when he returns and like Isaiah our guilt has been taken away, our sin has been atoned for by Christ.

And like Isaiah we have seen the King and we will see the King when he returns and like Isaiah our guilt has been taken away, our sin has been atoned for by Christ. We know that in and of ourselves we deserve judgment and yet through Jesus and his righteousness, his righteousness which he won for us in his victory over sin on the cross. Through his righteousness we have received mercy and grace and we will receive mercy and grace at the last judgment.

As we approach another year how do we respond to this? As those who have received the mercy of the King how can we take this with us? What can we bring? Like the prophet Micah we might ask, "With what shall I come before the Lord and bow myself before God on high? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams and ten thousands rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?" Nothing can for sin atone and yet how does the Lord respond? The Lord who has forgiven, the Lord who is merciful, he has told you, O man, what is good and what does the Lord require of you but to do justice and love kindness and to walk humbly with your God. Our sins are ever before us and yet through Christ God has shown us mercy and so how do we respond? We are to respond by taking that mercy to others. As we cling to the cross hoping in the mercy and justice of God let's take this message into the world this year. That the King has come, that he has died, that he has risen, that he is enthroned at the right hand of the Father and that this King Jesus Christ who rode into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday is coming again to make all things new. We have received grace and mercy through Jesus so let us go and proclaim his glory among the nations. Let's proclaim as we have sung so many times, "No more let sins and sorrows grow nor thorns infest the ground. He comes to make his blessings flow far as the curse is found. He rules the world with truth and grace and makes the nations prove the glories of his righteousness and wonders of his love." As you go proclaim this good news. "Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest."

Let's pray. Heavenly Father, you have shown us great mercy and compassion. You have not dealt with us as our sins deserve but you have bought us with your blood. You are our advocate before the Father so Lord we ask that you would give us hearts to be your messengers to a world that desperately needs to hear that the King is coming. The King has come. The King has come. Lord help us to do this. Help us to take this message with us. And it is in Christ's name that we pray. Amen.