# Trick Question #3 - The Greatest Commandment

Good morning. You can turn with me this morning to Matthew, chapter 22, verses 34 through 40. That's where we'll be. We're continuing in this walk through the Gospel of Matthew, the story of Jesus, his works and his words. And we have moved from that, basically the first 2/3 of the book that describe his ministry in and around the Sea of Galilee, the healings there. And he's teaching the disciples, showing them what it means to be a part of the kingdom and what kind of king he was going to be. And we've moved from that sort of area very kind of just showing us Jesus in that way to this last week of his ministry which we have here.

In the last third of the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus is heading to the cross. And so the text takes a very serious turn. He's come into Jerusalem at what was known as the triumphal entry. He's traveled there to the Passover feast that was occurring at the time. There would have been just very huge crowds. Every area in the city was crowded. The temple was crowded, the roads were packed. And he's there with some of his family and friends from Galilee, with his disciples. And also there are the chief priests and the Sadducees, the Pharisees, Jesus' enemies. They're very attuned to what's going on in the city because they don't want there to be any kind of trouble that might cause the Roman occupiers to sort of bring down the hammer on the people. And so they're very anxious for there to be no trouble. Jesus has come into town. They're very alert to that fact, and they begin to have some interactions with him, particularly after the first thing that he does, which is go right into the temple and start releasing animals and overturning tables of people who are exchanging money and creating a bit of a stir to demonstrate his authority.

The day after he does that, and this is the day that we're in now, sort of his second day, he returns and he tells these three parables that paint the religious leadership in this incredibly negative light. They are very frustrated by that always has been his message, the inclusion of those who are the low estate in society and culture, those who are not powerful, those who are not wise, those who are not seen as wise, those who are not wealthy. This he's calling them into the kingdom, the sinners, the tax collectors. And so they're very frustrated by this. They're angry. They're sort of done. The crowds, of course, love Jesus. And so they plan these questions to trick them. There are three, three questions.

The first question concerned taxes and whether to pay this particularly onerous poll tax. It was a real offense to them. Jesus' response was to call his questioners and everybody within earshot to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's. And that silenced the malicious men who were questioning him initially. The second question, the crowds, of course, marveled at this. But then the second question came from a group called the Sadducees. And their question concerned primarily the Resurrection. And Jesus' response not only affirmed the reality of the resurrection, but called on all who were in earshot to consider God's word and God's power, and that he is the God of the living and not of the dead.

And so today we're going to look at the third and final trick question, one asked by a scribe, a lawyer, a Pharisee, who was sort of focused in that area, and he had been listening back and forth. The Pharisees have gathered again around Jesus to attempt to entangle him in his words. So hear the word of the Lord this morning from Matthew 22, beginning at verse 34:

But when the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they gathered together. And one of them, a lawyer, asked him a question to test him. Teacher, which is the great commandment in the law. And he said to him, you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment. And a second is like it, you shall love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments depend all the law and the prophets.
This is the word of the Lord.

This morning I have both for preparing to talk about today's sermon and for entertaining entertainment value, listen to some of the confirmation hearings that have gone along gone on this week. These dialogues are just full of what we see today and have been reading about in the Gospel, full of trying to trap the person who is sitting up front with trick questions. You know, questions that have the ring of something like, are you willing to retract your earlier statements when you clearly said that you hate children? That has a problem. And then I love it because they'll say yes or no. It's never there is no good answer because it's not a yes or no question. But that's how these things go. And like I said for the observer, they have a mild entertainment value. But what we see in all of that is there really is nothing new. The modern politician comes from a Long line of such people, those who try to entangle their opponents with their words, try to get them something that will try to trip them up. And this is what Jesus is once again facing. Not exactly in a panel format, but more in a Pharisee surrounding Jesus and starting to ask questions format. He is being asked a bunch. And I suppose for the crowds, that also might have had mild entertainment value, as well as sort of them listening in to see what Jesus would say.

So who's asking this question and why? Well, we see here in the scripture that it's the Pharisees again. It says, but when the Pharisees heard that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, word got back to them about the Sadducee question and answer period. And first, I mean, they themselves knew that they had been called hypocrites by Jesus. So not exactly a glowing, you know, endorsement. And the Sadducees then have been called know-nothings and wrong. Okay, so here's this guy coming in saying that he's the king and everybody's sort of gathering around him. And he said to the one set of religious leaders, you all are a bunch of hypocrites, and to the others, you're idiots. So that's it. That's his declaration. And the crowd loves this stuff, right? They marveled at Jesus, answered. They were astonished that he was sort of putting the big guns in their place. And the religious leaders, of course, are wondering, are they on the verge of losing control of this whole situation here? So it says that they gathered together. The Bible uses that phrase. It's the same phrase that is used in Psalm 2, when the Bible says, why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain? The kings of the earth set themselves and the rulers take counsel together. They gather together against the Lord and against his anointed. So they've gathered together. There is great antagonism towards Jesus that sort of. Matthew wants to show us a picture of that by reminding the people who are reading of this psalm, that was a declaration of that, that the kings of the earth, those who are powerful, are setting themselves against the king. And that's what's happening here.

So what question could they possibly ask him? Well, there it is. The lawyer asked him a question to test him. It says, teacher, which is the great commandment in the law. What they landed on was a theological question. They were steering clear of culture war issues. They weren't going to ask him anything more about taxes and what he thought of the Romans and all that kind of stuff. So they Steered clear of the culture war. And they also steered clear of scenarios that bordered on comical, like we saw last week with the nine brothers and one wife and all of that. So they go for a more straightforward approach. It almost doesn't seem like a trick question, does it? We're so used to Jesus' answer that we don't see that he was asked this as a test. And so Jesus is asked this question. But one of them, a lawyer scribe, very familiar with the Jewish law, went ahead and he did it. You know, teacher, which is the great commandment of the law. This question was what might be considered a common kind of insider question at the time. Christians have all, if you've been Christian for a while, we have all kinds of these questions. You know, are you predestination or free will? Are you post mill, all mill or premil? If you don't know what any of these are, that's fine. Premil, is it possible for Jesus to be your savior, but not to be your Lord? Is it okay to. Do you know what John was even talking about today? The number of times that there's just dispersives on what's okay to do on the. On Sunday and what's not okay to do. Those are insider questions. And what I mean by that is that they're totally disinteresting to a non-Christian person. They don't care whether you're predestination or free will. It might be very engaging dialogue for those of us in the church, and that's fine. But it's an insider question that's being asked, which is the great commandment in the law by the calculation of the rabbis in Jesus' day.

And what made it an insider question is that there were 613 commandments in the first five books of the Bible. And so they had gone about the business of categorizing all of these commandments in different ways. Which ones were heavy or weightier? Which ones were the light ones, which ones were the greater ones? Which ones were the lesser ones? They just categorized it all. And as they discussed all this, the rabbis would see in the Old Testament certain texts that seem to summarize things. So you may be familiar with Psalm 15, the Psalm that begins, O Lord, who shall sojourn in your tent? Who can dwell on your holy hill? And then it talks about the righteous man. That one they said contained 11 principles that summarize the law. So some rabbis saw that as a great summary. Jesus himself describes things along the lines that the rabbis had come up with. If you look A little ahead in the Scripture to Matthew, chapter 23, verse 23. You'll see him talking to the Pharisees. And he says to them that you tithe mint and dill and cumin, and you have neglected the weightier matters of the law, particularly the areas of justice and mercy and faithfulness. And so Jesus himself uses this kind of picture. The test then, was an insider test, you see. Would Jesus say something in response to this question that would put him at odds with at least a large enough of a set of other rabbis who might be around that they could move the crowd to a place where even if they weren't going to call him a heretic, or even if they weren't going to call him a false teacher, they could at least say that he wasn't qualified as a rabbi, he didn't pass the test well enough. Better rabbis had said better things. You really can't trust him. That's what they're shooting for. So the lawyer asks the question. It's out there. How will Jesus respond? Will he respond in such a way that he can just simply be dismissed by those who are listening or not?

One of our favorite Christmas movies is It's a Wonderful Life, and many of you have seen that. And there's this one scene where the main protagonist, George Bailey, he notices the woman who would be his wife, Mary. He notices her for the first time. She's. She's been there his entire life. She's been a part of this small town her entire life. But there's this point where he notices her. And it would be very easy to notice her, because in old black and white movies, whenever someone gets noticed, what happens is that as the camera pans and he's at some high school thing, I think, and as the camera pans over onto her face, it sort of focuses on the face. And then, like, this glow appears. And you might know this if you've seen black and white films. This glow happens around her face, and all of a sudden, there she is. He notices her because, of course, there's a glow around her face, but. And she's the only one in the building with that. What's happening here is these are things, these are scriptures that Jesus is talking about that they have known their entire life. One of them is they were supposed to, like, bind on their hands and have on their foreheads and write on their doorposts. He's not saying anything new, but he's putting the glow right there. He wants them to notice them. He wants us to notice these. You know, Bible passage like that, you've read them a lot, they've always been a part of it. But then one day, like, you read it again, you're like, oh, sort of noticing it again. So this is what Jesus is doing here.

You shall love the Lord. Here's his answer. You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with your soul, all your soul, with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment, and it's straight out of Deuteronomy 6. This commandment was followed by, in Deuteronomy 6, a reminder to do such things as. So write God's law on the doorpost of your home. Teach God's law to your children. Talk about it as you go about your day. There's just straightforward. Right from there, it's the first and great commandment. And then the second he said, which is like it is, you shall love your neighbor as yourself. That is a direct quote of Leviticus 19, verse 18, the same commandment with regard to one's neighbor. The Lord had called the people through Moses to not hate in your heart or bear a grudge or take vengeance against your neighbor. But he says in Leviticus through Moses, you shall love your neighbor as yourself. Jesus isn't saying anything new. He's just bringing the cameras, bringing the glow right onto these texts. He wants them to notice them. They've been living this way their whole life and they haven't noticed the Scripture.

Notice first, the consistent focus of Jesus' responses to these trick questions. You know, you remember the first one, his response was, you know, you should give back. You should render to God the things that are God's. And in his second response, he said, you know, you need to remember that God is a God of the living. He's a God of power. He's a God whose word you need to think about. He's not the God of the dead. And in this first and great commandment that the Lord, he's saying that the Lord your God is a worthy of all of you, not just your heart, not just your soul, not just your mind. You know, nothing can be held back. Everything belongs to Him. You are His. The focus in all of these responses all the time is hardly on what you have to do and much more on who is God. Do you see him? The focus is on God and our relationship to him. And Jesus wants us to notice that. He wants us to notice.

Second, the central place of love, love is at the center of our responsibility towards God. You shall love the Lord your God in The Scriptures, when we see love directed towards God, we see that it's essentially an absolute, fundamental commitment to him. That's what it means to love God. You are absolutely fundamentally committed to him. So Jesus says all of who we are. He just reminds them. He shines the light on it. All of who we are should be directed towards loving God. Notice that. How do we display our love for him? We do that in things like obedience and in praise and thanks and trust. Trusting him, we show that we love God. And as we move from love of God to love of neighbor, the scripture fleshes out even more for us what love is. Right? Love is patient and kind. Doesn't envy or boast. It's not arrogant. It's not rude, doesn't insist on its own way. It's not irritable. It's not resentful. It doesn't rejoice in wrongdoing, but rejoices in the truth and good things. Love bears all things and believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. Love never ends, you know, and then the second commandment Jesus gives reminds them of, shines the light on you shall love your neighbor as yourself. Has this unique way of describing love. Doesn't says that you're supposed to love your neighbor. And then it doesn't list all those things. Like in Corinthians that I read for you, it says you're supposed to love your neighbor like you love yourself. It's sort of a unique way to think about it. What does it mean to love yourself? CS Lewis was thinking about this once, and he said, you know, thinking about loving himself. He said, I don't exactly get a feeling of fondness or affection for myself, and sometime I don't even like my own company. And he's just pointing out that to love our neighbor, if love is to be like how you love yourself, doesn't mean that you have to like your neighbor. Very difficult for us to get a handle on that, by the way, we live in a culture where the idol is that you have to be nice to everybody all the time, that you're supposed to be nice, that it's not nice to say that you're not allowed to like or that you can not like somebody. But I hear you. I gave you the permission to love your neighbor. Doesn't mean that you have to like them. But it's hard in this world. One of the idols, the idols of being nice and nice means that you have to accept everybody for who they are, regardless what they're doing, who they are. But the truth is that there are some things about myself, if I'm honest, that are either sinful or irritating and that I hate and I want to change. I mean, I think that you would say that about yourself. But besides, who likes someone who always thinks they're wonderful and right and has no room for change in anything because they're just great? They just love themselves that way. I'm awesome. Love does not mean we must feel fond of someone or think that he or she is nice when they're not. So what does love mean? Well, love can mean hating some of these things about this or that person, particularly those sinful tendencies, even. Like we'd hate things about ourselves to love our enemies for again, Jesus always includes them in his definition of who the neighbor is in a different place. So to love our enemies doesn't mean we must like them. They can be cruel and wicked. To love them means to hate the cruel and wicked things about them and to desire. To desire that they would change that they might be free of their slavery to sin. To love them means to want Christ to work in them so they won't die in that state. To love our enemies means to have pity on them in their slavery, to satisfy sin. To love them means to want them, to reform and to repent. To love them means that you're not going to personally take vengeance on them and harm them when they sin against you. To love them means that you're going to pray for them, especially when they are doing wrong. To love them means sometimes you're going to be put in a place where you have to speak hard truths to them. But of course, we do these things for ourselves. When we sin. We can speak truth to ourselves. We can be sad for ourselves. We can desire that we would change. We can desire that Jesus would do something to, you know, get this one sin out of me, would do something to make me more like this. That's what it means to love ourselves. We want Christ, and we pray that the Lord would do that in us because we love ourselves. Jesus says we're to love our neighbor that way. Love never means that we have to pretend. Jesus isn't calling us to pretend. Hating sin in ourselves and in others is loving ourselves and others.

Jesus the King gives his answer. He says love for God and then love for our neighbor. Love takes the center stage and he makes these old familiar texts glow. You know, he wants them to look at it. He wants them to look and think about what does it mean to love? What does it mean to love God what does it mean to love our neighbor? We see the consistent focus of Jesus' response. We see the central place of love for the Christian. And third, there is this call to notice again, these scriptures. There's just this call we're being called by Christ to change always. Why? Because he loves us. That's why he calls us to look at this and to explore a little further. You know, if they would just look at these scriptures, they'd see this focus on the Lord. They'd see this focus on love and its action relationally. And it's hard to imagine that they wouldn't see that life is not a set of rules to be followed, but a relationship with the living God.

Can they see when they listen to these scriptures, do you hear that? And then say like, well, then give me the rules to follow. I'll show them how I love them. Like, this is what Jesus is always talking about. It's not about rule keeping. He's going to speak in the passage we'll look at next week, but he's going to speak. He's going to say, look, this isn't about cleaning the outside of a cup or a plate, but inside, you know, you have hearts of greed and self-indulgence. It's not about tithing and doing things right, but then at the same time neglecting the weightier matters of justice and mercy and faithfulness that are all relational. Jesus lifts love way above all concrete do's and don'ts and regulations. Life is about relationship love for your God and love for your neighbor. And if we look at that and we think about ourselves and what that takes and what that's taken as Christians in our lives, what we know is that that requires a great deal of self-denial. It will require sacrifice on our part. And we see that of course in Christ. It requires considering another person's interest, sometimes, often, always as more important than your own. It requires that we pray for each other, that we encourage each other, that we help each other as we walk through life together. And in all of that, always keeping our eyes on Christ, who is the perfect example of what love looks like, we have to notice him. We have to notice what he's like. We have to notice these texts. And of course, none of this is easy. Everything that you, when you walk out of this room and everything will be working against everything that Jesus is saying right now. We live in a culture of total self-absorption where the current counsel at least is often to just eliminate totally the difficult people in your life. Rather than praying for our enemies, we can now just put them out, declare them toxic and be done with it. But the Christian knows, even as they're kind of figuring out, well, how do I relate with this person? They know in their Ardo hearts that this or that person who has harmed them is still their neighbor. And that no matter how difficult these relationships may be, there is still this call that's in the Bible to love our neighbor. And we've got to wrestle with that. There's still this call to love, to pray for our enemies, to pity them in their wickedness or in the sadness of their estate, and even to bless them. So we live in that culture. But I mean it's not just that. It's not just we go into a place that's just kind of totally self-absorbed now. We walk out and it's a world that of just increasing isolation away from one another through massive distraction. That's everywhere. I mean I just, like I said, I enjoy for entertainment value some of these things. But sometimes I think like, well, boy, we can get so wrapped up in what our views are about, all of the big issues which by the way have been defined for us by other people, that we can be so wrapped up in what our views are, those big issues that we forget about the people who are right in front of us that God's put into our life that take up, oh, I would say actually 24 hours of your day. So, so maybe we should ask ourselves, are our eyes open to those who are right around us? What does it mean to love the person who's sitting right next to me? What does it mean to love my neighbor that God has given me as my neighbor? But it's easy to get isolated and remain thinking that we're important by having views. And then finally, of course, we've always lived in a culture of self-indulgence. We do what we want to do, we buy what we want to buy. We have the resources to do that. We're always having worked against us. Anything that sort of like would move us towards generosity, move us towards loving others. Moving. It's. You walk out the door and it's not easy. None of it is easy. But we must hear Jesus today. You know, he called us to notice his commandments. We're familiar with them, we've read them before, we've seen them, we're living with them. But he's shining that glow on them. He wants us to notice them. After all, he says, listen to this. On these two commandments depend all the law of the prophets or elsewhere. It Says on these two things hang the entire Bible. So we have to pay attention to it. Everything hangs on this. Both are absolutely essential. And although the one loving your neighbor flows from your love for God, right? Like the reality is, is that for the Christian, you can't have one without the other. You can't love God and hate your neighbor. What's that? And you can't love your neighbor and hate God. What's that? He says everything hangs on these two commandments. That's how he answered the question, what is the great commandment in the law? Scribe said, and Jesus answered, you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment. And the second is, like it, you shall love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments depend all the law and the prophets. That was, that was his answer.

The account of this exact same situation in the Gospel of Mark, same story. Mark tells us a little bit more. He says that when Jesus is finished speaking, that the scribe who had come as the tester says that he was impressed. Like that was a really good answer. So he was impressed and, and he said, so he told Jesus, he said, rabbi, teacher, you have answered well. And for one brief moment in this man's life, there was an opportunity because Jesus said to him, he responded to him, which, you know, doesn't always happen. Jesus responded to him and he told him that he wasn't far from the kingdom of God. But that's where it ends. The scribe never asks a follow-up question. He never says, well, I'm not far from the kingdom of God, how do I get into the kingdom of God? He's content with being a religious leader. He was ready to say, Jesus, you did a great job. You answered well. But he wasn't ready to follow him. You see, today there are plenty of people who would read this passage that I just read, who would look at what Jesus said and they would say, yes, oh yes, it sounds great to love God and to love other people. Great. That sounds like great. It sounds almost American. It's good. You did a good job, Jesus. You answered well. But Jesus doesn't want our vote. Jesus wants our life. He wants you to follow him. He wants you to love him with your whole heart, your whole mind, your whole soul. He wants you to flee from sin and the consequences of sin that brought about the broken relationship with God, God and others. He wants you to come to him in repentance and faith that our relationship with God and with others might be restored. The Lord doesn't give us the Scriptures so that we can tell him we think he did a good or bad job. He gave us the Scriptures so we can tell him thank you. So we can know the truth. The truth about ourselves, the truth about him, the truth about His Son. And having heard that truth, that we might repent of our sin and follow Jesus. May we do that. May we joyfully strive to follow the great commandment to love the Lord our God with all of our heart and our soul, our mind, as well as that second commandment that is like it, to love our neighbors as ourselves. And may the Lord be glorified as we do these things. Let's pray.
