You can turn with me this morning to Matthew, chapter 11. If you're visiting with us, we've been walking through this gospel together for some time now. And we're at this place in the gospel where this man John, who was a preacher and the one who baptized Jesus, Jesus's cousin and close associate, he's in jail. He's in jail because he confronted the powerful King Herod, who ruled over Jerusalem and the surrounding regions at that time with the support of the Roman Empire. He had confronted him about Herod's adulterous relationship with his sister-in-law. And eventually, John not only would be in prison for this, he would lose his life because he spoke up.

John's own disciples would come and minister to him, and in one of these times, a word about Jesus and the excitement that sort of surrounded him kind of reached John's ears. And so he had sent his disciples to ask Jesus a particular question. And the particular question was, is Jesus the one? Is he the Christ? And so they go, they ask him this. A couple of weeks ago, we talked about his response, what witnesses to Jesus's life and ministry and eventual death and then resurrection, what they saw and what they heard and what that means for us. John's disciples, then hearing this, go back and report to John what Jesus had said. And the story comes back to Jesus, and Jesus is now engaging with the crowd that's still there, and he speaks to them about John and then also about them. And last week, we considered the beginning of his message, which was concerning his and John's refusal to play the game that the religious leaders and the cultures wanted them to play. And we looked at our call to do likewise and to be those who live a life of wisdom, hearing God's Word and seeking, striving to follow after what God would want in our lives, what his will for us would be.

God's Word and God's works, they have this way of dividing people. We've talked about that before, and Jesus talked about it a lot. And as he continues to speak with the crowds, he's going to talk more about that today, about how important it is to come to him and to come to Christ rather than to refuse to repent. So hear the Lord this morning. Matthew, chapter 11, beginning at verse 20: "Then he, Jesus, began to denounce the cities where most of his mighty works had been done because they did not repent. Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I tell you, it will be more bearable on the day of judgment for Tyre and Sidon than for you. And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? You'll be brought down to Hades. For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I tell you that it will be more tolerable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom than for you."

At that time, Jesus declared, "I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for such was your gracious will. All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal it. Come to me, all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you'll find rest for your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."

This is the word of the Lord this morning. There are difficult parts of being a Christian. If you've been a Christian a while, you know that's not a surprise. And one of the difficult parts of being a Christian is the rejection of the gospel by others that we care about. Most Christians have experiences. We know what Christ has done for us on the cross, and we're glad. I'm glad. I hope you all are glad that you're Christians, that the Lord has saved your soul. And so as those who are glad about that and who know those truths that we've been given, we go and we do something that's kind of obvious. We start to share that with other people that we love and that we care about. We're hopeful. We're hopeful that they will see what is so absolutely clear to us, and we're hopeful that they will embrace the gospel. And then we are saddened by their apparent rejection of what is central in our lives. It's difficult to be a Christian.

Of course, for Jesus, rejection wasn't about rejecting something central about his life that he's sharing. It was rejecting him because he is the center. Jesus did many mighty works, the Bible says, and he was rejected. And he's quite direct about the consequences of rejecting him. Woe to you, he says. Woe to you. He names three cities: Chorazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, cities where most of his mighty works were done. Most of his miracles were done. These cities, the people that lived in these cities, had come out and they had seen it all. Things which, as Christians now today, we say things like, boy, I wish I would have seen this. Wouldn't it have been awesome to see? Well, there's a whole cities of people who did with their very eyes. They saw it. They saw Jesus make a blind man see. They saw Jesus lift up a lame man on that stretcher and tell him to walk. And they saw him pick up his stretcher and walk out the door. They saw that. It wasn't a report. It wasn't a story. They saw it with their eyes. They saw people who were on the fringes and outside of society, the lepers. They saw Jesus speak, and lepers become clean. They witnessed it, and they saw it. They saw deaf people who couldn't hear them. All of a sudden, now they could hear them. They saw it. They saw dead people raised because Jesus, on occasion, did exactly that. There were people. Lazarus did not come out of the tomb in, you know, some secret story in the middle of the night in a back—like there were all kinds of people there. They were all crying and mourning and all of that, and Jesus right there in the middle of the day. Lazarus, come out. They saw these things, and they heard everything that Jesus was saying. They heard it. They saw it. These cities he's mentioning. Most of his work was happening in these cities. What was their response? The Bible says they did not repent. They did not turn from their ways and turn to God. They did not turn away from whatever they were following before to follow after Jesus. They didn't do it. And there were reasons they didn't do it.

For the religious leaders, they didn't follow him because of their pride. I mean, Jesus was threatened, and they thought it was far more appropriate for Jesus to follow them. They wanted Jesus to act a certain way. They wanted Jesus to say certain things. They wanted Jesus to play the game because they were the leaders, not Jesus. And Jesus wouldn't play the game. He didn't do things the way that they expected or they wanted him to do. And so, even though they saw all the mighty works that Jesus did, they didn't repent. Oh, what about all those people that brought people to Jesus? Surely all of them, I mean, all the relatives of the deaf guy or the paralyzed guy, surely they all came to faith. Because, I mean, think of the miracle. Nope. No, for the crowd, it seems that Jesus was useful. He was useful as a miracle worker, and he was interesting. He was interesting to listen to. He spoke with an authority that wasn't like what they normally heard. Jesus was useful, and he was interesting. They would bring their sick, but once the sick were healed, it was back to normal. The number of changed lives where the healing accomplished the purpose, a person's healed, and then all of a sudden the purpose of that healing, you know, driving people to repentance deep in their hearts—you just don't catch that. People would be healed like the ten lepers. There's that story where nine of them Jesus never hears from again. One of them comes back. It's like that. Probably there's a little bit of repentance going on, but for the most part, no. He's useful. There were a lot of healings done. He's interesting. There were a lot of great sermons heard. But they needed to get back to work. There were things to do. Lives to live. Maybe a post-healing apathy set in. People lost interest. They could take it from here now that their husband, father, sibling was better. That was great. So thankful, so thankful. Pride, self-reliance, self-sufficiency. Sin is such that ultimately, even with all of that, there's just this attitude of dismissiveness towards Jesus.

So Jesus pronounces woes on these cities. He compares them to Old Testament pagan cities where there was no gospel, there was no, you know, just straight-up pagan cities, Tyre and Sidon. Sometimes they would be allied with Israel, sometimes not so much. And then Sodom, the Old Testament picture of wickedness. Sodom. And he says that the pagans in those cities, if they had seen what Jesus was showing them, the cities concerning him, if they had seen it, they would have repented. But that these cities, cities where the people of God are, cities where the Messiah

 was anticipated and looked for, cities where the law was discussed in the synagogue and the scriptures were open to people—those cities, they wouldn't repent. The Bible says that everyone who has been given much, much will be expected, and much was expected. It is so bad to have seen Christ's work and then to have denied him by refusing to turn from their sin into God, to follow the Christ. So Jesus compares the judgment that they would receive as more severe than that of Sodom or Tyre or Sidon or any of those pagan cities, that it would be more tolerable to be from Sodom in the day of judgment than it would be to be one of those people in the crowd that thought that Jesus's healings were cool. In fact, he even goes so far as to say, you know, oh you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? You know? Will you be like part of God's kingdom? No, he says you'll be brought down to Hades. Like the pagan kingdom of Babylon, like the Tower of Babel itself, they would be brought down. Their self-sufficiency, pride, self-reliance, all of that, it would be shown for what it was. It's really kind of remarkable. I mean, it seems that what is real, what is true, is that all of the positives, miraculous healings and perfect preaching, right? Like it never said something that he, afterward, like sometimes I might have to like, ooh, I might not have wanted to say it. But perfect preaching and miracles aren't enough to cause a person to repent.

There are always going to be people who will appreciate your prayers. Thank you for praying. There will always be people who might even listen to you talk about your faith and the great things that Christ has done for you. There might even be people who think that there's a God and that he's been good to them in this or that or the other way. But in the end, there's just dismissal. It's foolish, they might say, for you to follow Christ. Or it's offensive. Maybe even they're a little intimidated by it because it'll be costly to follow Christ, you know, they're not quite ready for that change, right? The pain we know is better than the unknown. And so what is so dear to you can be just dismissed. I thought about that, I thought like for me, like, you know, sometimes it's not, it's not me if I share the gospel with someone they rejected, it's not, it's not me that they're dismissing. It feels that way, doesn't it? It feels like they're dismissing you because it's like everything that's important to you. But in the end, it's not you. It's the one who's being dismissed. Christ is being dismissed.

Now if miracles, if the ability to do incredible things, miracles and perfect preaching, like words that are always pointed and exactly correct and true, isn't a 100% guarantee of repentance, then what is? How does a person come to faith? Well, Jesus helps us here because he suggests here and elsewhere that all of this is a work of God's Spirit, that truth is something that must actually be revealed to us. It doesn't come naturally, it won't be naturally in spite of whatever obvious clues to believe because of our sinful nature. And that it will be especially true that it will be hard for those who are wise, powerful, rich, and so on in the world. And this is what he says: "At that time Jesus declared, 'I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven, that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding and you revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for such was your gracious will. All things have been handed over to me by my Father. No one knows the Son except the Father. No one knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.' Revealing with revelation. He says to the wise and understanding there in the world there's been no revealing. It's hidden. God did that. The Lord hid from them these things. Those who one might think, you know, because for us, for us Christians, we think this is the absolute most rational faith on the, I mean, there is just why, why can't you see how awesome the gospel is. For us we think that way. But what the Bible says is that unless the Father shows them that the wise and understanding simply won't believe the gospel, they won't repent. Instead, the Father in some sort of, his kind of gracious will, what he's done is he's chosen not to reveal the most important things in all of everything. Not to those who are wise and understanding and powerful in the world, but instead what he does is he reveals it to people like us. He calls us children. To those that should scamper along in the eyes of the world. The Apostle Paul in writing to the church in Corinth says it like this. He says the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing. But to us who are being saved it is the power of God. For it is written, 'I will destroy the wisdom of the wise and the discernment of the discerning I will thwart.' Where is the one who is wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this age? Hasn't God made foolish the wisdom of the world? For since in the wisdom of God the world couldn't, didn't know God through wisdom, it pleased God through the folly of what we preach to save those who believe. Jews demand signs, Greeks seek wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, which is a stumbling block to the Jews and it is folly, which is what most of us experience, to Gentiles. But to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God because the foolishness of God is wiser than men and the weakness of God is stronger than men. Paul says it. And then he looks out on his congregation and says, so consider you. Let's consider you. This is like being preacher talk. Consider you. None of you are wise by worldly standards. And then he says, and in terms of powerful, when I look out I see no power. You are not powerful, he says. And in terms of your births, you are not of noble birth. This is what he's saying. Paul keeps going. He says, but I want you to know this, that God chose what's foolish in the world to shame the wise. And he chose the weak of the world to shame the strong. And he chose what is low and despised in the world, that which is nothing. He chose to bring to nothing things that are so that no human being anywhere, ever, can boast in the presence of God. Because of him, you are in Christ who became to us wisdom from God, righteousness, sanctification, redemption, so that as it is written, let the one who boasts boast in the Lord.

Brothers and sisters, Paul provides for us this reason that the Lord does the things in the way that Jesus is talking about. Revealing truth to children instead of all those who the world would look at and say, wow, they're wise, they're powerful, they're noble, they're awesome. Instead, he reveals it to regular, normal, low, despised people for this reason, so that no one will boast before God. So that the one who boasts will boast in the Lord. So that we'll see and we'll know and rejoice in the fact that revelation is all of God's grace, and it's never the fruit of our intellectual prowess. Comprehending the gospel, repenting of your sin, has absolutely nothing to do—be glad about this, young people—it has nothing to do with the grades that you receive in school. Nothing. Repenting and believing the gospel has nothing to do with the degrees or the accolades or anything that you've received at your work. Nothing. Receiving and repenting of your sin and embracing the gospel has nothing to do with what the world thinks that you are, whether that be awesome or whether that be not so much. And for the most part, we'll be in the not so much category.

Jesus tells us that this truth is revealed to us by Him. He says He's the one that's let you in on all that. That all things have been handed over to Him by His Father. No one knows the Son except the Father. No one knows the Father except the Son and anyone who the Son chooses to reveal to Him. Jesus is saying something remarkable that would have been scandalous at the time because everything He said sort of fit into that category. He says this. He goes out in front of a crowd and He says, do you want to know God? There is only one way for you to know God, and that is to know me. That's what Jesus said. If you want to know God, you must receive knowledge of God from the Son, from Jesus. It must be revealed to you. And so if you want to know God, you must first know Jesus' Son. And to know the Son, you must do this. Repent. Repent of your sins and cry out to Him. He is always leaving us with no easier way than that. Jesus does not leave us with a choose-your-own-adventure path type way to God. Only through Jesus can someone know God. Can someone know the Father? And what a blessing it is to know the Father. I mean, consider what the scriptures reveal to us about the Father as Christians. As Christians, we know our Father. Consider the creation that God has made. What beauty and order. We don't think about this maybe too much, but because of your belonging to Jesus, you see everything differently. It just is that way. Because He's doing this. He's revealing things to you. So we see the creation as the creation. The beauty, the order of it all. Many of us travel to see the eclipse, and

 even if you didn't, you maybe were able to be outside and marvel at it. As a Christian, you marvel at these things. But in the time leading up to it, I was made aware, reflecting on some things that would come across my way of what people were saying about the eclipse. It was interesting to me. And for spiritual types, there was this idea that the eclipse, if you kind of got your crystals out and stuff like that, you could kind of take in the power of the eclipse. There was like a magic to it, because it was awesome and cool and spiritual. So you could sort of grab that. And in our system, in our way, we always see such things as opportunities to make some money. So people were selling t-shirts and getting, you know, if you were in that sort of eclipse line, I'm sure that the prices of hotels and those places went up during that period of time. So the eclipse is something that you could use to get some additional resources. And then there's always the opportunity to tell us how we should live our lives. I will not ask you to raise your hands. But I will ask you this. How many of you have actually looked directly into the sun before in your life? Now I have multiple times. And I can still see. But there's always this kind of like, here's another opportunity. The eclipse gives us an opportunity to tell you how to live. And to what be afraid of? You'd be afraid of this now. The eclipse is science. Let's just talk about the science of what's happening here. See, there's no creation in that. It's just, here's the stuff that's happening. And how can I use it? Or make some observations? You're a Christian. This is God's world. You go out there, you sit, and you enjoy it. You love that God made a sun, a moon, an order. You look at the gracious complexity of everything that God has done and made, and you marvel at it. Because you're a Christian. You see, to know the Father means that you know creation in a different way than you could otherwise. You're just free. Not just creation, but His providence, His fatherly care. How many of you, when you look back at your life and you know those worst times, and there are worst times for all of us, and you know that in the worst times, the Father was with you? You were not abandoned. When you were outside of Christ, He was with you. How do you know that? Because you're a Christian. You've had that given to you. It's a gift. In every area of life, you know the Father. You know what He's like. You know His providence. You know His creation. You know His fatherly care. You know His character, His goodness, His power, His holiness, His justice, His righteousness, His truth, His love for His people, His mercy. You know His saving acts. You know what He's done, the extent of His love for you, that He would send His only Son to die for you, like you. You know all of these things. What a gift. What a gift.

So what should we do in response to all of that? Well, the first thing Jesus is saying is repentance. The first thing we need to do is repent. Repentance. Asking the Lord for the gift of salvation, wanting to know God, being overwhelmed by His goodness, and seeing in an increasing way just the ugliness of our sin and wanting that to be gone. We want to enjoy what God has given us, what He's done and who He is. We want to glorify Him and just enjoy Him forever, and that means we need to be repentant and get rid of sin. We need to be seeking and striving to obey our Lord in everything that we do and enjoying Him and being free. The second is not just repentance, but we see here also that we ought to give thanks because that's what Jesus does. He starts at the beginning of His prayer. He says, "I thank you, Father, that it is this way." Aren't you thankful that you didn't have to be noble to have eternal life? Aren't you thankful that you didn't have to be powerful to have eternal life? Aren't you thankful that you didn't have to be great in the world to have eternal life? Aren't you thankful that you don't have to be cool to have eternal life? Aren't you thankful that you don't have to follow all the endless striving that is thrust on you in every category of life every time you turn on that screen? Aren't you thankful that you don't have to be any of that to have eternal life, to know God? Jesus was thankful for that. But that's God's gracious will. Jesus denounces these cities. He thanks the Father for those who do believe, who have the truth revealed to them. And then He looks at the crowd and He calls them to something. And this is what He says. He says, "Come to Me all who labor and are heavy laden, I'll give you rest. Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle, I am lowly in heart, and you'll find rest for your souls. For My yoke is easy and My burden is light." Jesus says, "Come to Me." Who? Who should come? All who are, who labor and are heavy laden. Do you come this morning with burdens? Sin is consequences. Are you under a load of care? You know, our burdens are many. There's just the general cares of life that we have. The burdens of illness, the burdens of relational difficulties, the burdens of fixing things that are broken all the time, the burdens of going to work every day, the burdens of wanting your children to succeed, feeling for them when it doesn't go well, you know, the burdens that are just the general cares of life that we carry. And then for some, it's the burden of just being enslaved to sin. Maybe a particular sin. Maybe it's not. That general slavery to sin before you become Christian, but still there's that sin that entangles you. There's a burden that you come. There is a yoke, something that holds you and makes you serve that idolatry, serve yourself in some way. Or maybe you walk under the burden of self-righteousness, of I'm going to be good enough. I'm just going to do this thing or that thing or follow this, and then I'll be good enough. And then there'll be people who will appreciate me, and then I'll be approved, and then I'll be—maybe you live under that burden. But of course, any time we deal with burdens, often the solutions that we come with, they themselves become burdensome. We think of all kinds of ways to deal with problems in our lives. That ends up only being more problems. And burdens, relieving our burdens often becomes burdensome. Jesus says, "Come to Me. Come to Me, all you who are burdened, labored, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." And then He says, "Take My yoke. Don't take another yoke. Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me. Put yourself in His service under Him." Why? Why should we do that? Because He says, "Because I'm gentle, I'm lowly in heart, I'm humble. I'll treat you well. My yoke is easy. My burden is light."

Are you under the burden of sin? Christ frees us from slavery to sin through His work on the cross. He set you free. That's His burden. You're free. Christ's way isn't burdensome. No longer do we need to try to please God by scrupulous adherence to man-made regulations. No longer do we need to live life trying to just get the approval of others through doing these kind of heavy things, whatever they require of us, discipline-wise, in order to get the approval of others. But instead, Christ's way. It's a free way of living life as a servant. We live for Him with thanksgiving. We seek to be like Him. We repent when we fall. We fail, but our salvation is assured in Him, so thanksgiving is our motivation rather than fear of judgment or striving to justify our lives by being good or getting other people to prove one. We don't have to live that way anymore. You've been set free. Christ says, "Take My yoke upon you. Be free." And Christ is also with us in our cares. It's His yoke. He doesn't say, "Take this yoke, and I'm going to hand it over to this other person." He says, "Just take My yoke upon you and learn from Me." Christ says, "I am with you. Always." That's His yoke. His yoke. It's His yoke. He's not giving us over to someone else to take care of us. He personally cares for you. He personally cares for your life. When things are hard, He is with you. He is with you, and things seem to be going your way in a swimming kind of way. He is with you. It is His yoke. Will you take it? Will you learn from Him? Because what He promises, if we come to Him and if we take on His yoke, then we will have rest for ourselves. We'll be at peace. We'll be free. How will you respond to the Lord revealing Himself in your life? The crowds and the cities responded with apathy and dismissiveness. I hope that's not the case here. I hope you respond with faith. It's an important question. The state of your soul hangs in the balance, I think Jesus is saying. Will you, like the cities in Jesus' day, when faced with the reality of God's work and creation and providence in your life, simply dismiss Jesus and one day face Him? Or will you come to Him? Will you take His yoke upon you? Will you learn from Him? Will you find rest for your souls? Christ is calling you today. Come to Him.

Let's pray. Father in heaven, we're grateful. We're so grateful that you have revealed in your Word and by your Spirit the truth of the gospel, that in Christ there is forgiveness of sin, there is freedom from our greatest burden, that in Christ there is a better way, a way that leads to life. Give us hearts then that are repentant, that look to you always, that are grateful, and may we grow in our knowledge of and our love for you. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray these things. Amen.