The gospel is a treasure that we've been given. Jesus himself is a treasure. The kingdom of God, the Bible says, is like a treasure. Jesus said it's like a mustard seed. It starts small, but it's not small forever. It becomes the bush, like a tree, that no one can ignore. The gospel and the kingdom are like leaven, always powerfully at work. When the gospel of the kingdom, the good news of Jesus Christ, the message that there is forgiveness of sin and eternal life for all who believe in him, is sown in the heart of a person and the person believes, Jesus describes his or her life as abundant and fruitful, as productive and blessed.

We've looked together at Jesus' teaching about the kingdom. He often taught these things in parables. The parables had the effect of opening up the hearts of those who believed, growing them in their knowledge of God, and closing up the hearts of others, those who received Jesus' teaching with apathy or with outright hostility. When Jesus finished teaching a crowd in parables, he headed back to his hometown, Nazareth. He had been speaking to the crowds for a while, and now he's heading home. Last week, we heard about that time, how he was rejected by those who knew him best in his hometown. Then we saw how Herod, the ruler at that time, had brutally murdered his friend and cousin, the great prophet John the Baptist. All of this, this rejection by his own and the brutal slaughtering of his cousin and friend, led to Jesus withdrawing. That's where we're going to pick up this morning.

This is the word of the Lord, Matthew 14:13-21:

Now, when Jesus heard this, he withdrew from there in a boat to a desolate place by himself. But when the crowds heard it, they followed him on foot from the towns. When he went ashore, he saw a great crowd, and he had compassion on them and healed their sick. Now, when it was evening, the disciples came to him and said, "This is a desolate place, and the day is now over. Send the crowds away to go into the villages and buy food for themselves." But Jesus said, "They need not go away; you give them something to eat." They said to him, "We have only five loaves here and two fish." And he said, "Well, bring them here to me." Then he ordered the crowds to sit down on the grass, and taking the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven and said a blessing. Then he broke the loaves and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds. They all ate and were satisfied. They took up twelve baskets full of the broken pieces left over. Those who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and children.

This is the word of the Lord.

This morning, a couple of weekends ago, we had just a great blessing of being able to join with the Scarboroughs in Darlington for a big feast they had during the Darlington parade. Between the parade and fireworks at Lloyd's house, he invites friends and neighbors and family, just a large crowd. When it came time to eat, a table was set, and it's just this long, long table. I don't know, maybe there were forty or so people sitting down at a single table. We all sat down and then the food began to be passed. Everybody was asked to bring something to share, and so we did that. You're sitting there and the food just keeps coming. Here's the next item, here's the next item for your plate. It just kept coming. There were leftovers, which were also then shared at the end. It was a lovely time.

We're looking at a feast like that this morning. We see fish and we see bread multiplied. We see the people seated and all eating. We see Jesus presiding over this feast. This feast is a picture of even a greater feast, which Jesus gives wherever he is. That's what I'd like us to consider this morning, this feast of Jesus.

Jesus is coming from this horrifying event of John the Baptist's murder. He's gone to withdraw to some desolate places. He sails to the other side of the lake. The Bible says that the crowds heard that he did this, and so they followed him there. When he went ashore, he saw them all coming. The Bible tells us what his response was. It says that he looked at the crowds and he had compassion. The compassion of Jesus leads him to heal. It says that he healed their sick. We know previously that when Jesus saw crowds, he saw them in a particular way, that he saw them as like sheep without a shepherd, harassed and helpless. Jesus shows compassion. His compassion drives him to do something. First, with respect to the healing of the sicknesses of those that came to be healed in that way. Then, with respect to showing hospitality, to feeding all of the people. He invites, or the Bible says orders, them to sit down on the ground and to prepare to receive a meal.

This is Jesus. He shows compassion. The disciples do not have compassion. That was not their response. The Bible says that when evening came, the disciples came to Jesus and they said, "Look, this is a desolate place and the day is now over. Send the crowds away to go into the neighboring villages and get some food for themselves." We read that and we've probably, if you've been a Christian for a while, you've read through that. But I was thinking about this and I'm realizing that if you put yourself in their position, they're just hungry. They themselves are hungry. It's been a long day. They're tired. Maybe you've been in a similar situation. You come home, you're kind of exhausted from work and then you realize that you have some event that evening you're supposed to go to. Or, oh, somebody's coming over tonight. How excited are you at that moment?

But Jesus, he wants the crowds to stay. He wants to eat with them. The sheer magnitude of the compassion that Jesus shows for people is on display. It's never self-serving. It's never reluctant. Like that feast in Darlington, it keeps getting passed around. The food just keeps coming. The compassion keeps getting poured out on people. He heals the sick. He says they don't need to go away. He's coming after an incredibly traumatic event of John's murder. The first thing he does is he continues to pour out compassion on the lost. He meant to go and to withdraw, be by himself. But no, the people come and he is never self-serving. He's never reluctant. It's all free. It's all warm-hearted. He's always looking at the needs of other people. He always sees that.

What did the disciples see? They saw the people as a problem. They were hungry. It was a long day. The day's coming to an end. They only have five loaves and two fish for the twelve of them. So they're like, "Well, we're going to have to do some fishing or gathering of our own. Get the problem out of here." But not Jesus. You see, we're the recipients of that compassion. We've been invited to Jesus' feast. Christ feeds us with his compassion. Christ sees our every need. Christ goes to the cross to minister to our greatest need, to heal us in our helpless estate. Christ wants us to be at the feast and he passes around the compassion. He won't force anyone to come, but he's calling us to repent of our sins, to believe the gospel, to trust him with our salvation, with our lives, and to sit down and to receive his gifts of compassion.

Christ's compassion never runs out. It is a continuous meal, continuously cycling around the table. The compassion that he shows to us in our weakness. The compassion that he shows to us when we're struggling against sin. The compassion that he shows to us in our distress. The compassion that he shows to us when we're anxious. The compassion he shows to us when we're discouraged. The compassion he shows to us when we're walking in shattered relationships and in a fallen world because of sin. The compassion that he shows to us as we bear the burdens of this life. His compassion is continuous. Wherever we are, whatever we're doing, whatever we're going through today, his compassion is being poured out on you as his people. You're never a problem to him. He never just wants to send you away. "Go get your food somewhere else. Go get your help somewhere else." Christ invites you to his feast, and his feast is full of compassion. Are you grateful for that compassion this morning? Do you know the compassion of Christ? Can you look back at times in your life, or even things you're walking through now, and just see that Christ is with me, he loves me, he's shown that I'm not a problem to him, that he wants to be with me? Then look at him and marvel at that. Give thanks for the compassion of Christ. Then imitate him. Ask him to grow you in your compassion towards others. Not merely a pity that stays uninvolved, but a compassion that will drive you towards places of healing and feeding those that the Lord has placed in your lives. A compassion that drives you to pray for and to encourage and to strengthen your brothers and sisters in Christ. A compassion that drives you to reach out in word and deed with the gospel to a lost, helpless, hopeless world. We're a world full of neighbors and friends and family who aren't problems. Be grateful for the compassion of Christ that is just continuously being poured out on us. In that gratitude, show that compassion towards others.

So, the feast of Jesus begins with the passing around of compassion, but what's next? Well, before the feast in Darlington, before any church supper, before any meal, what Christians do is Christians pray. We pray. Sometimes we'll be in a restaurant. I remember

 as a younger person, we were one of those praying families that prayed in restaurants. I remember as a younger person, I felt quite uncomfortable with that. That people might be looking at me. That people might be looking at us and I felt maybe a little embarrassed, maybe a little bit odd. I don't feel that way anymore and I'm not embarrassed by being a little odd to those who also might be nearby. In contexts where there are no Christians and no Christian leadership, people just start eating. It's like grabbing without gratitude. When we pray before a feast or before a meal, we acknowledge the great giver of all blessings and that we once again are being passed out food from his refrigerator, from his pantry, from his storehouse, from his providential hand. He looked up into heaven, the Bible says, and he blessed, said a blessing. When he ordered the crowds to sit down on the grass, he took the five loaves and the two fish and he looked up to heaven and he said a blessing. Christ always acknowledged the Father in all things. So he does so here. He takes this bread and fish, likely it was just the remnants of what the disciples had for themselves, and he looks up into heaven and he says a blessing. Jesus knows and proclaims always that all good things come from the Father's hand. When asked how to pray, how does he encourage us to pray? He says, "Thy kingdom come and thy will be done and give us this day, give us please, Lord, this day our daily bread, and forgive us our debts, and lead us not into temptation and deliver us from evil." We need the Lord's help. All good things, all blessings come from the Father. He knows that feeding the five thousand plus people that were there was impossible without God's blessing. So he says a blessing. There are only five loaves and two fish. That's all they have, right? But on this day, Jesus would display God's power to make a great feast out of a few loaves and a couple of fish, to make something out of nothing. It's a creation story. It's the mustard seed parable in fast forward. Jesus makes much from just a little. We can see here the abundance of God's blessing, five thousand men and the women and their children, and there were leftovers. The abundance, the bread would remind the people, we know, of Moses and the manna that would come down from heaven, given by God, the bread from heaven and the blessing that that was. Jesus would say that he himself is the manna that comes down from heaven, that he is the bread of life, that he is the feast himself. If you come to him, then you'll be blessed. That blessing, the blessing of belonging to Christ, is a feast in itself. It is passed around continuously for those who are in Christ. Today, this day, the Lord continues to make much from little. The preaching of the gospel, small seed-like, God's words, take root in so many hearts. So the kingdom expands throughout the world and within the person, within the Christian, even as a little bit of food can strengthen the human body, sharpen the mind, lighten the heart. The gospel strengthens and sharpens and enlightens the Christian. His blessing is abundant. Without the work of God through Christ, we would be without that blessing. God's blessing for us is poured out in our salvation, in the Lord's provision for us, in our adoption as children of God. The Lord has blessed us in so many ways, impossible in our own strength, but abundant in its very nature. His blessings are like that. They just are pouring and continuous. The apostle would later say, "The Father has blessed us in Christ with every," not a few of the spiritual blessings, not some of the more important spiritual blessings, he says, "He's blessed us with every spiritual blessing in heavenly places." Are you someone who's experienced the blessing of God? When you think of yourself as a Christian, do you see yourself as blessed? If you do, the response to that is to give thanks to Christ. Look to Christ and give thanks. He's the one who invited you to the feast. He's the one who blesses you again and again and again and again. He said of you, a poor sinner, he said of me, a poor sinner, "Don't go away. Don't send him away. Don't send her away. Come to the feast. Be blessed." Then he calls us to share the leftovers. I think of 1 Timothy 6 where Paul's writing to Timothy and he's encouraging him. He says that Timothy ought to teach this, that as for the rich in this present age, charge them not to be haughty, not to set their hopes on the uncertainty of riches, but to set their hopes on God who richly provides us with everything to enjoy. They're to do good and to be rich in good works and to be generous, to be ready to share. In doing that, they'll store up treasure for themselves as a good foundation for the future. The person who has received much is called to share the leftovers. The Lord loves a cheerful giver. As he cheerfully gave, I imagine that the disciples gathering up these twelve baskets, one would hope that at this point, the compassion of Christ had sort of like moved itself a little bit in their own hearts and that they wouldn't look at the twelve baskets and say, "Good, ours." But that they would always be looking for opportunities from that point forward to maybe say, "The Lord gives, we ought to ourselves be generous." As those who have received a feast of the blessings in Christ that we have, may we look to bless others as the Lord gives us opportunity.

Jesus invites us to his feast. It is a feast of compassion. "Don't send them away." It's a feast of blessing. Five thousand men and also women and children, food for them all. The blessing of God. So they eat. What does the Bible say? It says that they all ate and that they were satisfied. It's a feast of satisfaction. They were satisfied. The Bible doesn't say they all ate and boy were they stuffed. "Man, they sat back on the grass and laid back and said, 'Wow, that was the largest move. I should not have eaten that much. I'm going to have to run tomorrow to make up for it.'" It says that they ate and they were satisfied. They were satisfied. They weren't stuffed. This wasn't a gluttonous feast. This wasn't a Herod feast, a display for the people where murder was on the menu along with the blood. Murder was on the menu along with lust and lies and greed and power, hunger and hatred. This was Jesus' feast. The Lord gives food and he satisfies. It's satisfaction. That's the nature of the Lord's feast. The crowds are fed and they aren't hungry anymore. Christ brings satisfaction to his feast and he passes it all around. On the cross, the Bible says that he satisfies God's wrath against sin, that he satisfies God's justice as he takes the penalty we deserve. In doing this and then rising from the dead, Jesus satisfies man's deepest longing, the longing for a restored relationship with God, the longing for eternal life, for salvation from sin and the end of sorrow and grief and pain. He gives us all that we need and he satisfies our deepest longings. With this as our foundation, he then brings satisfaction into our daily lives so that the apostle Paul could say something like, "I've learned that whatever situation I'm in, I'm content. Christ is with me. Christ's feast is satisfactory. I'm well fed. I have enough. I have all I would ever need because I have Christ." We come to Christ hungry and helpless. We come to Christ tired and heavy-laden and burdened with sin. He satisfies us with life and with salvation and with everything that we long for in the deepest parts of our life. He satisfies us.

Are we thankful? I say that because this story goes on. If you read the same account in John, it goes on and it turns out no, they're not thankful. But there's precedent for all of that. Let's see, Israel going through the wilderness and they said, "We don't have anything to eat." So God says, "Fine, I will satisfy your desire for food. What I will do is I will make every day bread appear on the ground. You'll go and you'll gather that up and that will satisfy your hunger." The Bible says that after a while they just began to complain about it. They forgot that it was miraculously provided for them from heaven every single solitary day. Instead, what they do is they complain about it. Christ gives all that we will ever need. He is our satisfaction. Are we satisfied with that? Or do we complain? He never promises us ease. He doesn't say to the crowd here, "Let me give you a meal and then you, like I said, just lay back and in your comfort and ease and just, you know, enjoy the rest of your life." He never promises that. He never promises us that we get whatever we want whenever we want it. At times, we know we experience very unpleasant things, awful things. The Bible says that we will suffer. But he'll be there. He'll satisfy you at those times with his presence and comfort and hope and help in times of difficulty. The promise that one day, one day, and this is the promise, that one day we're going to be at the great feast. The great feast in glory, the great feast where death and sin and tears and hostility, they are no more. There will only be satisfaction. You will always be satisfied. You will always be passed around once again the blessings of God. You will always receive and be encouraged and be grateful for the compassion and the kindness of Christ. Christ will be there serving you, loving you over and over and over again. The food will keep passing and passing and passing around in glory.

 It's the feast of Jesus.

There's a hymn we sing that puts Christ at the center, that encourages us that until that day when we join in that feast together, the hymn writer says, "Let us love our God supremely and let us love each other too. Let us love and pray for sinners until our God makes all things new. Then he'll call us home to heaven and at his table, we'll all sit down. Christ will gird himself and serve us with sweet manna all around."

Let's pray.

Father in heaven, we are so grateful. Grateful for the feast you've invited us to. That you didn't send us away in our sin, but in Christ we have fed on your compassion. We've enjoyed the abundance of your blessings. We have rested in the satisfaction of knowing that we belong to you. Strengthen us today to live as those who bless others, who have compassion on the lost, who look forward to the great feast. All this we pray in the name of Jesus our Lord. Amen.