Good morning. If you're visiting with us today, we're very glad to have you here. We're looking together in the Bible as a congregation in the New Testament, the Gospel of Matthew, and it tells us the story of Jesus. You can turn with me there today to Matthew chapter 10.

For several weeks now, we've just been considering what it means that Jesus calls people to follow Him, and we've looked at why they should do that. The authority of Christ, we saw that He demonstrated the desirability and the wisdom of following Him by the authority that was shown in His teaching, that He demonstrated authority through the healing of the sick, and so He has authority over disease. He's shown His authority over the creation and calming the sea during the storm. He's shown that He has authority over the forces of evil and darkness, and that was made evident when He cast out demons. He's shown that He has had the authority over sin and over death as He offers forgiveness to people and even raises the dead. In all of this and in other healings, Jesus demonstrated that He is the King, that He's the Messiah, the Christ, the Savior.

The Bible tells us that because He was able to do all these things, that very naturally His fame grew. Word spread about this man who could do all of this, and so crowds started to come from everywhere. Crowds would gather, and when Jesus saw the crowds, what He saw were shepherdless sheep, helpless and harassed people, and a harvest, but very few laborers for that harvest of souls. And so He begins to call laborers, the 12 apostles. He gives them the authority to preach, and He gives them the authority to heal in His name, and then He gives them the details. How is this going to work? That's chapter 10. It mostly consists of that.

Last week we looked at three words that capture the essence of discipleship, the word to go, and then the word to be wary, to beware, and then to endure. Being a disciple of Jesus, and those of you who have been disciples for a while know this to be true, that being a disciple is not necessarily easy. There's much about the Christian life that actually is quite difficult. It can be hard. And they are going to discover, the apostles are in their life, and at some level, we all will discover just how hard it can be. And when they do discover how hard it can be, and when we do, then one of the tendencies is that we can become afraid. And so Jesus has words for us this morning about that in particular, and I'd like to read them to you. This is Matthew chapter 10, beginning at verse 24. So hear the word of the Lord.

"A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master. It is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher and the servant like his master. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they malign those of his household? So have no fear of them, for nothing is covered that will not be revealed or hidden that will not be known. What I tell you in the dark, say in the light. What you hear whispered, proclaim on the housetops, and do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Rather, fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? And not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your Father. But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not, therefore; you are of more value than many sparrows. So everyone who acknowledges me before men, I will also acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven. But whoever denies me before men, I also will deny before my Father who is in heaven."

This is the word of the Lord this morning. Every one of us in this room is either in the process of growing up in somebody's home, if you're young, or you grew up in one. And our parents are or were over us. Their decisions, decisions of those who bore you, decisions about jobs, decisions about where to live, decisions about how they would treat one another, decisions about how they would treat you, all of these things informed our lives. You can't escape any of it, of course. When I was eight years old, I couldn't tell my father which job he should take. I couldn't call my parents together and say, "Let's pack up our things. We're moving to wherever I might have seen in some picture book." I couldn't tell them how they should treat me if I misbehaved in my eight-year-old world. I wasn't above them. No child is above his or her parents. Just as no child is above the decisions made by his or her parents, good or bad, Jesus says, the decisions made by the teacher, the decisions made by the master, these are going to impact the disciples' or the servant's life. There is a connection. There is a union between those two.

He says it like this: "A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master." The disciple, the servant, is not above the teacher, the master, because the disciple is not the teacher and the servant is not the master. The relationship we have with Jesus is one that is just like this. Where He goes, we go. What people think of Him, they will think of us. Jesus goes on and He says it is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher and the servant like his master. It's enough for us to be like Him, to imitate Jesus, imitate the teacher, the master. It's enough for us to imitate Christ. We won't, of course, be the Savior, but He calls us to be like our Savior, to imitate Him. It's enough. Enough for what? Well, it's enough, that is, for the consequences of being His disciples to fall on us.

In other words, if you are striving to be like Jesus, the consequences of that will become very real in your life. You may not gain the promotion that you kind of want to have. You may find certain family members kind of hate that part about you. They want either nothing really to do with you or at least they don't want to hear about that side of you when you talk during the holidays. You may be laughed at. You may find yourself in a conversation where Christians are being sort of mocked or maligned. In some places, you may lose your life. You see, it's enough, Jesus says, to be like Him for the consequences of that to fall on you.

He goes on and He gives the apostles an idea of what they will face as those who are striving to be like them. Those who are striving to be like the master, to be like Jesus. He says, what you should expect if you want to be like me is you should expect to be maligned and, in their case, to be seen as imposters and blasphemers. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, the prince of demons, how much more will they malign those of his household? We are, as Christian people, we are of the house of Jesus Christ. He is the master of that house. In Jesus' day, they said that He was the prince of demons who cast out demons by the power He had over them as their prince. That was their view, the religious view of Jesus. The Roman authorities saw Him often as a possible threat, as an insurrectionist, maybe of sorts. And so all those who belonged to Jesus would have been seen in the same way. Jesus is saying, you can never disconnect. You are united to me. As they see me, they'll see you.

Now, in our day, Jesus is said by some to have been a great teacher who teaches us how to be good. Or some believe that Jesus is someone whose story was made up by others. Maybe He's a man of a make-believe man. Or maybe someone who might have believed He was God but was wrong. Or maybe someone who is a bit of a revolutionary. Or someone who loves everyone for what they are regardless of what they do. Or maybe most significantly common is someone who is largely irrelevant and can't really make your life whole. We should expect to be maligned as those who don't live up to His teachings. Or as those who are dupes for following a make-believe man. Or we should expect to be seen as those who are chasing the wrong person. Or as enemies who are trying to take over something and can't be trusted really by the authorities. Or we can expect to be seen indifferently as those whose lives aren't whole and so can be convinced like everyone else that we need more better stuff or we need to live in a better way in order to be made whole. In other words, as Christians, you can expect to be seen and understood through the lens by which people see and understand Jesus. That's what He's saying here. They will mock you if they mock Him. And they will love you if they love Him. And they will hate you if they hate Him. And they will be apathetic towards you and your faith if they are apathetic towards Him. They will see you as of little value if they see Him as of little value. And they may kill you if they are willing to kill Him.

How, like, what is it, that stuff that was around for a little while, the chicken soup for the soul? Like, how unhappy is that? What does a disciple or a servant of Jesus do with that information that Jesus just gave them? I mean, very likely, what it ought to do to anyone, it has the potential to do, certainly, and in their day where it was right in front of them, for sure, the suffering, the being maligned, the potential to even be killed for their faith, it might make the disciple or the servant, like, a little afraid.

We have, by God's grace, been living in a culture where that hasn't been something which we've had to daily experience, but that may not always be that way. If you're a follower of Jesus, He's saying you can expect to be seen by the world just like they see Jesus, and so that may be dangerous. It might make you afraid. So Jesus deals with this in the way that Jesus deals with things. One of the things you might say to someone who you're seeing that they're feeling anxious about something. So I don't know, maybe you all know some people who feel anxious about things every once in a while. And so the person's feeling anxious about something, and that something may or may not be a reasonable thing for them to feel anxious about, but of course the obvious response to that that we give is don't be anxious about that. Now, that normally doesn't receive a super positive response if you've tried that. And maybe it's perceived as a little insensitive, and maybe it is. But herein is Jesus speaking the truth always as He does, and after speaking to the disciples and letting them know how hard this is going to actually be, and so the fear might have ramped up in them, He says to them, "So have no fear of them." He didn't take the right class on how to handle anxiety. He says just have no fear of them. Since you know this is the way it's going to be, don't be afraid of them. On the face, that doesn't seem so helpful, and yet we should believe Jesus when He speaks to us, and He gives three good reasons not to fear men. Here's the first reason. The truth is going to come out. They may be saying Beelzebul house, but that's not going to stick. They may be saying Jesus is not the king, but that's not going to stick because the truth isn't based on an opinion poll. The truth is the truth. It's going to come out. False words spoken against you as followers of Jesus will not stick. They can't stand. Truth will always prevail. Sometimes not while you're alive, but no matter. Truth will always prevail. Nothing will remain hidden. Jesus says it like that. Nothing is covered that will not be revealed, hidden that will not be known. Jesus reminds His disciples that they are on the right side of not just history, but of everything. Jesus says you are on the right side, on Christ's side. He is the master of the house. Christian, you are on the side of the Lord of all things. Maybe Jesus knows that when we're afraid, the first thing that goes is not necessarily our actions for Him, but our words. When we're afraid, we clam up about Jesus. We're concerned about what people might think, whatever. So He continues here and He says because this truth always prevails, what you can do is you can just go right up onto the housetops and you can just shout without fear the gospel. What I tell you in the dark, say it in the light. What you hear whispered proclaim on the housetops. Truth will always prevail. You can speak it boldly everywhere you go.

Jesus wants to know don't be afraid. Don't be afraid because what you're saying is true. What you're proclaiming, what you're living out, it's totally the truth. Second reason He gives. Not only is truth going to come out, we don't need to fear man. I love this one. I love this one because the worst they can do is kill you. Now that sounds pretty bad. It sounds pretty bad if this life is all that there is. In fact, it is pretty bad if this life is all that there is. The resurrection of Christ, well it changed everything. It reminded us that this is not our home. The pastor, John Calvin, he encourages us here. This is what he says. He says Christians are going to be miserable if they don't set their minds on heaven and so rise above all that's in this world. If they don't pierce the facade of present circumstances, when they once have raised their heads above the earth, even though they should see the ungodly decked out in wealth and awards, enjoying the utmost tranquility, flaunting every kind of splendor and luxury, abounding in every kind of pleasure, even if moreover they should be wickedly attacked by the ungodly, haughtily insulted by them, exploited by their greed, or harassed by their desires in some other way, even then believers will bear such evils, for they will set their eyes on that day when the Lord will receive His faithful people into the peace of His kingdom when He will wipe every tear from their eyes, clothe them in garments of glory and gladness, feed them with the indescribable sweetness of His own pleasures, raise them to fellowship in His own lofty heights, and at last grant them participation in His own happiness."

Jesus says don't fear those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul. Remember, Christian, that you belong, body and soul, to your faithful Savior Jesus Christ. Truth is going to come out. You don't need to be afraid. Talk about everything that you know, everywhere, boldly, loudly. You don't need to be afraid because the worst they can do is kill you and you don't belong here. This is not our home. And then He says, the third one, He wants to describe to them the value that they have in the eyes of their heavenly Father, your value in His eyes. Jesus tells the disciples that they shouldn't fear men who can kill the body but cannot kill the soul, but they should fear God who can destroy both in hell. Whoa. As important as it is for all people to consider that reality, that statement that just was made, and it's important to understand that you've got to deal with God, Jesus isn't trying to whip His disciples into shape by terrifying them. He's reminding them of who they belong to, like they belong to the greater one. The men, all they can do is kill the body, but God, He created, He made it all. He rules over everything. What can these men really do to you? So they don't need to be afraid. They don't need to be afraid. They don't need to be afraid. He rules over everything. What can these men really do to you? So they don't need to give in to fear. They don't need to even cower. They don't need to cower before their awesome God. And so that they don't, so they don't give in to fear, so they don't just become cowering thinking God's angry at them all the time because He's so powerful, He goes from this massive picture of like God can destroy both body and soul in hell. He says, let me talk to you about sparrows. And then He says that are not two sparrows sold for a penny? In other words, the value that the world places on these two sparrows is a penny. And then He goes on and He says, but the Lord, not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your Father. The Lord made all things. And He calls us His children. And He cares for that which the world would say is essentially worthless, worth a penny. So Jesus just lays out the logic to them. If God cares about every bird that falls to the ground, I mean, does He care about you? He says this, what's really remarkable about Jesus is He says this knowing that He Himself is the picture of the value that God places on us. The apostle Peter would later say it this way. He said, you were ransomed from the futile ways inherited from your forefathers, not with perishable things such as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ. Your value in the eyes of your Father in heaven is infinite. Because what price can be put on the blood of Christ? There's no logic that works here. We deserve to be treated as worth less than the sparrow. That's what our sin has put us in that state. But instead, God calls us sons and He calls us daughters in Christ. Our value as Christians is based on God's love and grace demonstrated in the work of His Son, because nothing in my hands I bring simply to His cross I cling. Infinite value because He sent His Son to pay the penalty for your sin that you might live. What are you afraid of? What are you afraid of? Jesus gives three good reasons for us not to be afraid. Christian, why are we afraid of men? Why am I afraid? Maybe we don't always believe that truth comes to the top. And maybe we struggle to believe that our lives as Christians extend beyond the graves. Or maybe we struggle when we're feeling worthless with the truth that our Father is valuing us infinitely by sending His Son. I suppose the apostles may have struggled with this. I suppose this because Jesus is talking to them about it. But if you're a follower of Jesus this morning, let these words be of great comfort to you. Truth will come to the top. Christ is victorious over death. And so you will be raised from the dead to live and dwell with Him forever. And you are of such great value to your heavenly Father. And He calls you son. He calls you daughter. It'll be difficult to be a disciple. Our connection to Jesus will have troubles of all various sorts. We may become afraid and we will need to battle that all of our lives. But if we endure, if we stand, if we finish the race, we win the prize, eternal life, the blessings of being with the Lord forever. So Jesus calls His disciples to acknowledge Him and not to be afraid.

When I was in middle school, when I was in seventh grade, you know, if you can remember back to that time in your life, and for those of you who are young, it might not be hard to remember back to that time of life. But one of the things that starts happening is you start to become sort of aware of yourself. When you're small, you're kind of not really aware. But you start to become aware of yourself and you think that, which is of course not true, but you think that everybody is looking at you. And being a middle schooler, I was in the same boat. I remember one time that for some reason my parents had to pick me up from school. This seems a name, nothing big deal, no big deal. But I remember that they picked me up and I'm sitting in the back seat of my car, or their car, and we're behind a school bus and there's kids in the back of the bus. And I remember having this feeling of like, I don't want them to see me riding with my parents. I don't know why. It was embarrassing. So I started to slide down in the back so that nobody, no people on the bus could see me with my parents. I have, as you have heard me speak of before, whenever I speak of them from in this pulpit, I had good and loving parents. It's sad that I denied knowing them by my actions on that one day. Jesus ends this section of His conversation on discipleship with a call to not be embarrassed by Him ever, not for a day. But to acknowledge Him. It's a simple statement, really. Jesus says that everyone who acknowledges me before men, I also will acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven. And conversely, whoever denies me before men, I also will deny before my Father who is in heaven. The call is obviously, clearly to acknowledge Christ everywhere, openly, freely, loudly. We're Christians. That's the call. Hidden within that call is a remarkable statement. A remarkable thought. And we need to attend to it. And this is it. Jesus rules over our ultimate destiny. He will speak before the Father. And He will declare us as His own or not. And our eternity hangs on His words. So today I want to say to you that your choice in this one area matters. There will be no questions relating to your race, your gender, your ethnic background, your economic status, your position in the world, your successes, your achievements, or your miserable failures. There is one question. Do you acknowledge Jesus Christ as Lord? Of course, if you do acknowledge Him, that will mean a great change in the way you live and it will shape the events of your life and it will give you a new perspective on everything. You'll be following Jesus, you see. And you won't be just doing what you think is best in your own eyes. So it will all change. But this question, it's the question. The apostle Paul says it like this. If you confess with your mouth that Jesus Christ is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised Him from the dead, then you will be saved. For with the heart one believes and is justified and with the mouth one confesses and is saved. For the scripture says, everyone who believes in Him will not be put to shame. Just ties it back in. Why won't you be put to shame? Because truth always comes to the top. Do you acknowledge Christ as Lord? And if we do, may it never be that the Lord finds us like I was back in middle school. Hiding when His name is mentioned, embarrassed ever to be associated with or to be called a Christian, and forgetting, even for a moment, how glorious the one we are united to by faith truly is. For Christ is holy. Christ is kind. Christ is humble. Christ is gentle. Christ is just. Christ is the truth. Christ is the way. Christ is our Savior. Christ is the once-for-all sacrifice for sins. Christ is the resurrection. Christ is the life. Christ is the King. Acknowledge Christ.

Let's pray. Father in heaven, we are so grateful that your rule over all things includes us. That you know the number of hairs on our head and you care for every sparrow that falls and so you care about every one of us. That you've shown us how much you care in sending your Son to die for our sins that we might have life. Help us to respond by acknowledging Christ in all His glory, proclaiming the gospel boldly before the world, and living lives that are driven by faith and not by fear. Holy Spirit, comfort and encourage us with Jesus' words and help us to trust God in all things. It's in the name of Jesus that we pray. Amen.