"Good morning. You can turn with me today to Matthew chapter 12. If you're visiting with us, we have been walking together as a congregation through the Gospel of Matthew. It tells us the story of Jesus: who he is, what he did, and what it all means. And it's a book that gives us a picture of what it means to follow him, which is something which Jesus called people then and now to do, to be about.

The Gospel of Matthew, as it progresses, begins to emphasize that there's a growing conflict that exists between Jesus and the religious leaders of his day. And two weeks ago, we looked at two confrontations that gave us a picture of that conflict that occurred on and centered on the keeping of the Sabbath. And at the end of that conflict, the Scripture says that the Pharisees went out and they conspired against Jesus, how to destroy him. So that's how intense it is. The Scripture then says that Jesus, aware of that, withdrew from there and he knew their hearts, he perceived their plots.

But we learned last week that as the Spirit-filled chosen servant of God, the beloved Son of God, that Jesus wasn't going to spend his time just trying to pick fights with Pharisees. He had other things he was about. And that generally speaking, what his life looked like always was a life of quieter compassion, proclaiming the coming of the kingdom of God always in his words and in his actions.

So the Gospel of Matthew continues, and in today's text, we're going to hear a little bit more about this conflict between Jesus and the Pharisees. They interact again. But if we listen closely, what you'll hear is that it's not merely the Pharisees that Jesus has conflict with, but that there's a greater conflict in which he is involved and at the center.

So hear now the word of the Lord, Matthew chapter 12, beginning at verse 22:

Then a demon-oppressed man who was blind and mute was brought to him, and he healed him so that the man spoke and saw. And all the people were amazed and they said, "Can this be the son of David?" But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, "It is only by Beelzebul, the prince of demons, that this man casts out demons." Knowing their thoughts, he said to them, "Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and no city or house divided against itself will stand. And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand? And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges. But if it is by the Spirit of God that I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you. Or how can someone enter a strong man's house and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man? Then indeed he may plunder his house. Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters. Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven people, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven. And whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come. Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and its fruit bad, for the tree is known by its fruit. You brood of vipers, how can you speak good when you are evil? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. The good person out of his good treasure brings forth good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure brings forth evil. I tell you, on the day of judgment, people will give account for every careless word they speak. For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned."

This is the word of the Lord this morning.

When I was in college, I played tennis for our college team. And we were in a conference of schools that included some very wealthy schools, schools in Virginia, and you knew they were wealthy because they all had two names, like Washington and Lee, or Hampton and Sidney. And so we knew that we were going to get crushed whenever we would play these teams. You couldn't win. There was no way in which you could possibly win. I grew up, my father was a coach of a basketball team, and he used to tell the story that whenever I was discouraged, like I couldn't win in something, he said, "I knew a team once that was behind in the game by 30 points, and they came back and only lost by 20." This was the training that I was under. There was none of this kind of the underdog can win business. It was, generally speaking, the people who are better win.

And so when we would play Washington and Lee, it was inevitable, and we would talk about this as a team on the way up in the bus, and the conversation wasn't so much about maybe we'll do better this time. The conversation was about which one of us could stay out on the court the longest before we would get beaten. And so the entire strategy, which was kind of fun, was trying to find ways to delay every point so that you could be the person on your team that stayed the longest out on the court before the inevitable defeat. It's the dilemma that Satan finds himself in in the Bible. It's the strong man's dilemma. He can't win. How long can he stay out on the court? That's his dilemma.

In our text, Jesus heals a demon-oppressed man. It's very matter-of-fact, the story. The man was brought to him. He was demon-oppressed, blind and mute, and Jesus heals him. The aftermath of the healing is what Matthew wants to talk about, but just as a reminder, since we don't talk that much about demons in a helpful way in our world, I thought I would just look at this briefly again. That C.S. Lewis reminds us that there are two equal and opposite errors into which our race can fall about the devils. And one is to disbelieve in their existence, and the other is to believe and to feel an excessive and unhealthy interest in them. In the end, the devils themselves are equally pleased by both errors and hail a materialist or a magician with the same sort of delight. We might say that like this, that your cardiologist and Hollywood are not where you will get the best perspective on Satan or on demons. Scripture gives you the perspective, and it teaches us a few things before we continue. There are men and women, and maybe you've run into men and women like this in your goings on, with tormented souls and tormented bodies. Sometimes that's the work of demons, who the Scripture teaches, along with Satan constitute the spiritual forces of darkness that hate God. And we are not given in Scripture a how do we know that a person is demon-oppressed rule book. You're not given that. I'm not given that. But here's what we know. We know that Jesus always knows. He's always aware of a person being oppressed by a demon. He always knows that.

These men and women in the Bible that we come across that Jesus heals have largely been relegated to the edges of their society. People are generally safe from them. They are people who others just don't really know what to do with. It's far more sad than scary in every single solitary case. It is likely that some who are relegated to the edges of our own society suffer from this kind of oppression. Nobody knows what to do with them. Jesus heals these people. And in our text, what he calls this is binding the strong man. Strong man is a great analogy. It's appropriate. Martin Luther in his hymn "A Mighty Fortress Is Our God" describes Satan in this way: "His craft and his power are great and he's armed with cruel hate and that on earth is not his equal." This is a strong man.

But the strong man has a dilemma. And his dilemma is this, that his downfall is inevitable. He can do absolutely nothing to stop it. The healing of the demon-oppressed man is a picture of this. The triumph of the kingdom of God, Christ's kingdom, has arrived with power, and the devil must give way. He has no power over Jesus. So what does the strong man do? Given his dilemma, what does he do? Well, he tries to stay on the court as long as he can and wreck whatever he can. He accuses and he reminds us all of our sins against God. He seeks to sow shame in the heart, a shame that is incapacitating, a shame that doesn't go to Jesus, a shame that makes one feel like, "How can God ever forgive me for what I've done?" Satan seeks to sow shame in our hearts. And he seeks, as he has from the very beginning, the Bible teaches, he seeks to sow doubt. "Did God really say? How can God love you because of what you have done? Do you really believe that? Do you really believe this or that or the other thing? I mean, come on." Satan seeks to sow doubt in the believer and in all men. And the Bible says that he prowls around. He's seeking someone, anyone, to devour. Sometimes in world history he's resorted to violence, pushing the unbelieving world to be especially hateful to the church. He fires his arrows at the followers of Jesus, as Paul would say. He would do anything he could to just get at the king. He hates the king. But Jesus, our text says, binds the strong man. The strong man's power is limited. As great as it may be, it is absolutely nothing compared to Christ's. His impact is limited. God's will is never thwarted by

 Satan. So that all things are in God's hands, so that even Satan's work is ultimately turned to God's purposes. His impact is limited. And his time is limited. It's one of the pieces of salvation yet to occur, the end of his time altogether, his destruction. In the book of Revelation, the strong man is depicted in that book as having immense power and being no match for mankind and gathering all of the forces of darkness around the church to destroy it. And then in one verse, he's just kind of done. He's brought down easily and immediately with a word. It is not really a battle like is described sometimes in movies, literature, a battle between good and evil. There really is no battle. There was no tennis match when I went to play against Washington and Lee. That was not tennis. There was no battle between good and evil. Christ must win the battle. There's no other option. There's not a .000001% chance of Satan winning the battle. Christ must win the battle. And so in our text, Jesus binds the strong man. He shows that this is what he's doing by healing this man who is oppressed by a demon. And then he plunders him. He takes the man who had been oppressed by the demon and puts him in his right mind. He heals him. Satan must stand by while he loses once again. His whole existence is one defeat after another defeat. He loses once again to the one who is greater than him.

So the people watch all of this. And then they would do as all of us would do here in this room as we watch the Lord working in the world. We're always responding to that. And they respond to that. Growing up with brothers, I had several brothers, and that means with lots of brothers come lots of words, a lot of arguing over nothing that went on at the dinner table and elsewhere. Most brotherly arguing, if you grew up with a lot of brothers, you know, is unimpeded by facts and is simply an effort to win an argument. That's what you're always trying to do. Winning is what is important. And each of us was willing to say many careless words so that we wouldn't be in the place where we were losers in those arguments.

In our world, of course, this happens all the time and in even more hateful forms. Character assassination is fairly commonplace. That's not rational argument. That's just saying, "Okay, this person you shouldn't listen to because they're an awful person" or whatever. Character assassination is fairly common and it's a very effective strategy. And it's one which we see attempted this morning in the text.

After the healing, the crowd responds in a way that maybe if we were there we would find ourselves responding. They were aware of the scripture and aware of the promise of a coming king, a coming savior that was going to rescue the people. And they saw this healing and they responded in a way that was fairly reasonable. It was like they said, "Well, I wonder if, can this be the son of David? Can this be the king that is coming? Is this the one?" It's a way that's been asked in other places. It's not the same thing as faith. They're not like falling down and worshiping Jesus after he does this. But they extend to him the possibility that just maybe this is the son of David. This is the person that we're looking forward to. But the Pharisees are careless with their words. This is what they say when they see a man who they could do nothing with, who was blind and mute, all of a sudden being able to speak and see because Jesus said, "Be healed." Or it doesn't even say what he said but maybe looked at him, touched him. This is how they responded. They said, "It is only by Beelzebul, the prince of demons, it's only by Satan that this man is able to cast out demons." That was their response.

Why did they say that? I don't think they believed that. I don't think they looked at that and said, "Well, you know, I noticed that when he was talking to the demon-possessed man he seemed to have sort of an insider scoop and they were working." I don't think any of that stuff is in there. The reason why they said this was because Jesus was a threat to their power and he had to be discredited. And he had to be discredited in front of all those people who were saying, "Maybe this is the son of David." And they're like, "Nope, can't be, can't be. He's the son of the devil." So they resort to the worst character assassination that they can come up with. Jesus is an agent of Satan, they say, and the power by which he does his miracles of healing is demonic. That's what they said. Of course, that's absolutely ridiculous. The accusation is ridiculous. And it needs to be pushed back on. But Jesus, interestingly, in his way, is less interested in defending himself. He even says at one point, "Oh, say whatever you want about me. You can say whatever you want. It's fine. Say whatever you want." He's less interested in defending himself and he's more interested in pointing out that the Holy Spirit is at work here and that they ought not to talk about him in that way.

And so Jesus responds, and he basically says, "Look, you all are the blasphemers. Therefore, I tell you every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven people, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven." He's saying, "You're blaspheming the Spirit of God. You're calling the Holy Spirit's work the work of the devil." And he responds. He says, "You're being careless with the words that you're speaking." He runs through some logical arguments refuting their claims. He says, "Look, a house, a kingdom, divided against itself is laid waste. I mean, a divided house, you know, right, like what good is that going to do? Why would he do that? That makes no sense. A divided house can't stand." And then he gives them a little bit of side logic because he knows that some of them had sort of been attempting some demon-cast-outing of their own and maybe it hadn't gone super well. But he was like, "If I'm doing this by the power of the devil, you say, well, like, whose power are you doing it by?" And then he kind of throws out this logic too, like, "Okay, if the kingdom of God is coming, then doesn't something need to be done about the strong man? Doesn't something, doesn't he need to be bound? If his house is going to be plundered, doesn't he need to be tied up first? I mean, this is all logical what's happening here." He gives them this rational thing and he says, "So just stop it. Stop saying these things." And then he gives them these sort of clear warnings. First about who you follow. He says, "You know, whoever isn't with me is against me." And by implication, he's saying is against the Father, is against the Spirit, is against God. And Jesus says, "I'm gathering people. I'm gathering people into the kingdom and if you're not with me, what you're doing is you're working against that. You're trying to scatter them. Whoever isn't with me is against me." Jesus says those words. And then he warns them about what they say. "Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven either in this age or in the age to come."

I don't know if it's a question that still is sort of running around circles of Christians, but you know, if you grew up when I grew up in the evangelical 80s, you know the question of the unforgivable sin. And did I commit the unforgivable sin? And what even is the unforgivable sin? And that's all here, right here in this text. That's where it's talked about. That's where it comes from. And what we see is that it is calling the Holy Spirit the devil. That's what's unforgivable.

It is, as one commentator on this passage states, this is a wake-up call to arrogant people. It's not something that a Christian sort of stumbles into, 'Oh my, I've committed the unforgivable sin.' It is something that is sober-minded, rejection of the Spirit's work, and so ultimately of Jesus. Not in that sort of like, 'Well, I'll consider this further, and I'm not sure I believe right now, and I need to think more.' It's just ultimately actually calling Jesus evil like the devil, even in the face of evidence that shows absolutely the contrary. I think Jesus is just warning them, 'Don't keep going down this path. Don't end up this way. Where you call God the devil. What a careless word. Clear warnings against who you follow, about what you say, and then about how you live.' He says, 'Look, either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and its fruit bad, but you all, like this is, you're hypocrites. He says you speak one way, you speak good out of your mouth, but your lives are wicked. Then you say these other things, you do these other things that show to the contrary. Don't do that.' And then he speaks a proclamation of judgment. Because he says, 'You know, you're talking, you're doing a lot of talking, but it's from your hearts that you're doing the talking. From the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.' And he says, 'And by your words, you're going to be justified, and by your words, you're going to be condemned.' Jesus is loving the Pharisees. He's saying, 'You're playing a dangerous game. Stop playing a dangerous game.' The way he does that, he places that very real threat of judgment before them. Careless words.

I'd like us to look together at the Holy Spirit's work, which Jesus references here, and which is so important to adore and to be grateful for, versus calling that work evil like the Pharisees did. But before we do that, we need to stop and just hear Jesus' warning just one more time with that kind of click. Paul encourages us about how we're supposed to speak, because Jesus is saying your words are important. He's saying they flow from a heart, but that your words are important. What you're saying is important. And that we ought not to speak carelessly, but Paul encourages us in how we're to speak in a couple of his letters. And here is a sampling of what he says to Christians. He says, 'Let no corrupting talk come out of your mouths, but only such that is good for building up, as fits the occasion, that it may give grace to those who hear.' And he says elsewhere, 'Let there be no filthiness or foolish talk or crude joking, which are out of place, but instead let your mouths be mouths, let there be thanksgiving.' And elsewhere he says, 'Now put them all away. Put away anger and wrath and malice and slander and obscene talk from your mouth.' We all can hear that all the time. And may the abundance of our hearts that God has given us bring forth words of gratitude and encouragement and grace to those who hear us talk.

This sad interaction with the Pharisees demonstrates that opposition to the Gospel will always be present. That there will be those inside and outside of the Church who are in power, who are building petty kingdoms of their own, and they will always be threatened by Christ. Because Christ doesn't want to do that. Because Christ is the King. And they will always try to thwart his work and his people. If they stand, then they will face that same opposition. What's so sad about this is what is missed by everyone who opposes Christ. That's true here today. If you're outside of the Church or not a Christian, you're missing out. It's not just a threat of Jesus when he says, 'You know, you're with me or you're against me.' It's true that you're against me, against Jesus if you're not with him. But you're also missing out. That's really where he's driving this. Because what he wants you to know is that the Kingdom of God is coming. And to live a life opposed to Jesus is to live a life opposed, like right in the face of truth and beauty and the grace of the Gospel and the richness and glory of the Kingdom of God. To live in the face of that and just to hold your arms out and say, 'I don't want truth. I don't want beauty. I don't want grace. I don't want glory. I don't want your Kingdom.'

So I want to turn to that Kingdom now and how Jesus says that we know that this Kingdom that he's bringing has come. And that is that the Spirit of God, the Holy Spirit, is at work. That's what Jesus says. 'You will know if it is by the Spirit of God that I cast out demons, the Kingdom of God has come.' We live in a world of conspiracy theories where there's no sufficient proof one can ever give to convince those who have bought into any conspiracy theory anywhere. Jesus is always operating when it comes to his opponents with a set of men who have an idea which just can't be shaken. Their idea is that Jesus is a fraud and a threat and they refuse to go a different direction. Even though there is so much proof to the contrary of that way of thinking. The greatest proof, Jesus says, that lets us know that the Kingdom has come into the world is that the Holy Spirit is at work. Jesus' words are chosen carefully and he declares that the works that they are seeing, lived out right before them, are the works of the Spirit of God. He says, 'If you look and you see this man healed, that's the Spirit's power that did that healing. That's what happened there. And what that means is that the Kingdom of God has come upon you.'

After Jesus' death and resurrection, the disciples are in Jerusalem together during the Feast of Pentecost, and they are filled quite suddenly with the Spirit of God that descends on God's people, the disciples. And what they do when they are filled with the Spirit is they begin to talk. Careful words, good words, grace words. They begin to share the Gospel. Proclaim the Gospel. Proclaim the coming of the Kingdom of God. And they say, 'If you believe in Christ, there is forgiveness of sin and you too will receive the Spirit of God.' The work of the Holy Spirit, proof of the coming of the Kingdom of God, is going to continue in and through God's people until Christ returns. The Holy Spirit will continue to move and to shake the world for as long as, until Jesus returns. And his work is always the same kind of work. There is the plundering work of the Holy Spirit. The plundering work of the Holy Spirit.

Paul writes it like this. He says, 'You were, and we know this here if you're a Christian, you were dead in your trespasses and sins in which you once walked, following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that's now at work in the sons of disobedience.' In other words, you were not with Christ. You were against him. 'And among whom we all once lived in the passions of our flesh, carrying out all the desires of the body and the mind, and were by nature children of wrath like the rest of mankind. But God, being rich in mercy because of the great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ. By grace you've been saved. And he raised us up with him and he seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus.' The saving work of God is the work of God's Spirit, enabling, persuading, and enabling us to believe and to receive Christ as he's offered to us in the Gospel. The Spirit of God plunders the strong man who is bound. We were following in the strong man's way. And by the grace of God, you were rescued out of that way. You were taken from death into life, out of slavery into poverty. Out of being blind to being able to see. It's the plundering work of the Spirit.

And then there's the fruit-bearing work of the Spirit. Since the Holy Spirit is given to the Christian, dwells in the heart, and since out of the abundance of the heart everything kind of happens, our new life in Christ is filled with the abundance that comes from having the Spirit dwelling in us. And so the Bible describes that we begin not only to speak better things, but we begin to live in a better way. That fruit begins to be born in our life. That we're Christians and so we begin to grow as Christians. We grow in love. We grow in joy. We grow in peace and patience and kindness and goodness and faithfulness and gentleness and self-control. The Holy Spirit is working in the heart of the believer and generates these fruits in their life.

And then there's the spotlight work of the Spirit. Christ did all things by the power of the Spirit. The Spirit himself, the Scriptures say, function as a spotlight of sorts, a helper, strengthening us, comforting us, doing this by always pointing us to Christ. Always pointing us to Christ. You see, it's beautiful really. Everything in life that really is worth having, God gives by His grace. And the way that we know that we have it is because the Spirit is at work.

Is the Holy Spirit at work in you? Have you seen these things? Have you seen the saving work in your life? The driving out of sin? The joy of knowing that you're a Christian, that you're saved? That the strong man has been bound and that you have, instead of serving him or being a slave to his way, you're now a free person in Christ? Have you seen the Holy Spirit's work

 in you in changing the way that you are in the fruit bearing? Have you seen Him working on you? Sometimes He works on you with really hard, difficult things, but have you seen Him growing you and making you more like Christ all the time? Have you seen the Holy Spirit's spotlight work in your life? Do you know what it's like to be comforted by the Gospel or the Scriptures? Do you know what it's like when you're having struggles or difficulties to have that sense of like, 'I just need to look to Christ?' And have that sense that, 'Yep, He does care for you. Yep, He does love you. Yep, He is with you always until the end of all this.' Do you know the Holy Spirit's work in your life?

Because if you do, I want to encourage you with this. If the Holy Spirit is at work in you, you need to know the Kingdom of God has come. What good news? What good news for you? Because that means you're with the King. No one can ever snatch you from His hand. No one can ever, Satan's things will be ultimately foiled all the time. All things will be working together for good for you in Christ because He loves you, He cares for you. If that's not you, then can you see at least the Spirit's work in others? In other words, can you see in a person who is a Christian who is related to you or has befriended you in some way? Can you see a changed life, an expression of kindness and compassion towards your struggles? A person who seems sort of settled, who knows who they belong to and what they're about? If you can see that this friend, a person who is a Christian is changing, is different, it means something. It means the Kingdom of God has come. That Christ has come. And He's calling you to be with Him, not against Him. Ask Him to begin His work in you today and repent of your sins and trust in Jesus for salvation. That's the hope of the world, Christ.

Friends, Jesus has bound the strong man. And as Martin Luther reminds us, as Christians, in the hymn, 'A Mighty Fortress Is Our God,' the Spirit and the gifts are ours through Christ who with us sideth. So let your goods and your kindred go and this mortal life also because the body they may kill. But God's truth, it abides still and His Kingdom is forever. Let's pray. Father in Heaven, we're grateful that you have sent your Son into the world to bind the strong man. We're grateful for your Spirit that points us to Jesus, that bears fruit in us, that reminds us that the Kingdom of God has come. May we live thankfully in that Kingdom. May our words never be careless, but may they be gospel words that flow from hearts that have been changed by that same gospel. In all this, we pray in Jesus' name, Amen.