
# Sermon Text

You can turn with me in your Bibles today to Matthew, chapter 22, if you're visiting with us. We have been walking as a congregation through the Gospel of Matthew. It is the story of Jesus, his words and his works. The first two thirds of that book, that gospel, describe for us the beginnings of his ministry and the teaching and healing miracles that he would perform over the course of about three years. In and around the Sea of Galilee. Jesus is doing wonderful things. The crowds are gathering to hear him talk, to bring those who are sick to have them healed. He speaks with an authority that they're not familiar with. His works point to his being somebody particularly special, a prophet, maybe the Christ, maybe the Messiah, the Savior. There's some opposition during this time of his ministry, but it's largely local. It's not really the focus of the book. The focus of the book is showing us Christ is the king and all that that means, what that's like, what his kingdom's going to be like. And then the last third of the book is three years and two thirds of the Gospel. And then the last third of Matthew is about one week, the last week of Jesus' time here. Jesus has come into Jerusalem, what's called the Triumphal entry. He's traveled in. He's probably come with, like, most of his family and relatives from where he lives, an entire crowd from Galilee where he's ministered, who's following him, who's looking forward to seeing what is Jesus going to do next. And he enters into this city. News of his coming has sort of stirred up the crowd, at least some of it. And the roads are packed, the city's packed. The temple where everybody would come to worship, it's packed. And the chief priests, the Sadducees, the religious leaders, the Pharisees, they are there. The Roman officials are all around. They're all watching. They want to make sure that with all of the Jews in one space, that there wouldn't be like an insurrection, an uprising. So they're really attentive to anything that might be sort of stirring things up. And Jesus is. Is stirring things up almost right away. He goes in and he overturns tables in the temple and begins to demonstrate his authority as a king. He leaves the city, he comes back the next day, and the religious leaders are sort of checking in on him. And he paints in three parables these pictures of the religious leaders that are very negative. And he emphasizes the inclusion of the lower class of people. The sinners and the tax collectors have a place in the kingdom of God. And the religious leaders are quite angry at all of this. And so they plan to ask questions to trick him. And last week we considered the first one. It concerned taxes and whether they should pay this particularly offensive tax called a poll tax. Jesus' response, calling his questioners and everybody who was in earshot to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's. It silenced the malicious men who were disciples of the group called the Pharisees and another group called the Herodians. These were the ones who were questioning him. And they're silenced. They leave. The crowds marvel at this. And Jesus' popularity is growing, but the leaders weren't done with him. The next question was asked by representatives of a different segment of the religious leadership in Jerusalem, the Sadducees. So that's what we're going to read about today. We're going to look at this, the second trick question, this one coming from the Sadducees. So hear the word of the Lord.

> Matthew 22, verse 23:33. The same day, Sadducees came to him who say, there is no resurrection. And they asked him a question saying, teacher, Moses said, if a man dies having no children, his brother must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother. Now there were seven brothers among us. The first married and died, and having no offspring, he left his wife to his brother. And so too the second and third down to the seventh. And after them all the woman died. In the resurrection, therefore, of the seven, whose wife will she be, for they all had her. But Jesus answered them, you are wrong because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God. For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. And as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was said to you by God? I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. He's not the God of the dead, but of the living. And when the crowd heard it, they were astonished at his teaching.

This is the word of the Lord. This morning.

Several years ago, I was coaching rec league basketball. It was my first adventure in that. But my son John had wanted to play, so I said I would coach. And they were looking for coaches. I was brand new and I had no sense at all that there could be any politics in 11-12 rec league basketball. I was entirely wrong. And as the season sort of progressed, it became clear that there was one coach that everyone just universally hated. They hated this guy because he always had the best team. He would always work out the draft in his favor. He ran plays that kids who were 11 had a hard time knowing what they were even looking at and how to handle it. And he was just arrogant. He was on top and he knew it. 11 and 12, rec league basketball king. And this guy, he was the type of guy who might put his multiple 11 and 12 year old direct league basketball trophies. He might have actually had them on his mantelpiece, you know, above his fireplace. This is the type of person. And so everybody just didn't like him. I didn't know him, I was new, but I found that out because the team I was coaching actually beat his team in the playoffs. And that set up a celebration. Most of the time the children celebrate, but in this case all, all of the other coaches who were in the building were celebrating. And some coaches approached me after the game. They were thanking me. I had nothing to do with anything, but they were thanking me for putting this guy in his place. They didn't care about me. I was a placeholder. What they cared about, they hated the guy. This is the attitude of the crowd towards these people that we're going to encounter today called the Sadducees. It could have been Jesus, it could have been any other teacher. They just wanted these guys put in their place. They were the religious leaders that everyone hated. The Pharisees, people sort of tended to like them. The common people, they were kind of the common person's religious leader. But the Sadducees, everybody hated them. And so at the end of the incident, we read that when the crowd hear it, they were astonished at his, at Jesus' teaching. I imagine them astonished at his teaching. About as astonished as the other coaches were at my coaching. What they were excited about was that the Sadducees had been put in their place, that they were silenced. The crowds were happy. Well, let's consider together these Sadducees and the trick question that they asked Jesus that day in Jerusalem, who were they? They were a group that actually went out of existence after the temple was destroyed in 70 AD. They were members of the high priestly class. They were the high priests. So they were the chief religious leaders, the top dogs in Jerusalem. They were very wealthy, all of them, and they were Roman sympathizers. They had gained their power and they had gained their authority in the religious system by being accommodating to the government and by getting rid of people who got in their way. And they were responsible for the temple. They were the planning committee for the three major festivals that would come into Jerusalem, including the one that we're looking at, the Passover, when Jews would come from all over the world and come to Jerusalem. It was the Sadducees that would do the planning for all of that and would make sure that everything was, was ready. In terms of the sacrifices, in terms of the worship, in terms of the security, they were the Sadducees. But of more importance in the Bible anyway than their status was their theology. And the Bible says that their theology could be summarized in the following phrase. They say that there is no resurrection. In a way, the Sadducees are similar to early 20th century United States or Europe, when liberal theologians and pastors began to deny many fundamental doctrines of Christianity, one of the main ones being the reality of a bodily resurrection. The Sadducees looked down on the simpletons, people like yourself and me, the simpletons who believed that the Old Testament was God's word. They actually, even though both of them were opposed to Jesus, they and the Pharisees just, they couldn't stand each other. The Sadducees held that only the first five books of the Bible, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy, the Pentateuch, only those five books were authoritative. And in these books they maintain there is just absolutely no mention of the resurrection at all. And therefore there is no resurrection. Sadducees didn't focus on one's relationship with a living God, a covenantal God who cares about his people. They looked at the books and they saw the regulations for worship and they were about that. They were about following the sacrifice. You know, as I said, they're the chief priests. And so following the sacrifices, the way of doing the sacrifices according to the letter of the law kind of thing, because that's what it meant to be Jewish. Just do that. You go through the process, you get the process correct. The Sadducees were very unpopular. Their theology was not the theology of the common person. Their arrogance put people off tremendously. Their attitude of working with the Romans made people hate them even more. But they didn't care because they had the power and the money and the authority. So that's how it worked. There is a description that Jesus gives to their character. Last week we saw that the disciples of the Pharisees and the Herodians, Jesus said that they were malicious hypocrites. Now, the Sadducees were likely full of malice and hypocrisy themselves, but that's not the focus of Jesus' statement towards them. Jesus says after they, after their long-winded question, Jesus answered them. You are wrong. You are know-nothings, you're ignorant. And particularly with respect to two things, God's word and God's power. Now the Sadducees were proud. They were know-it-alls. They always thought they were right and they were educated and they were superior, they were the PhDs of the time and that everyone else was wrong. The Sadducees believed in power, to be sure, just not God's power which was clearly declared in God's word. They sought to maintain their own power while disregarding the God of the scriptures whom they profess to worship. So Jesus calls them out. They don't know at all they're wrong. They're know-nothings when it comes to God's Word and God's power.

The Sadducee class can develop and has developed throughout the history of the church under different guises. Men and women who deny God's power and His Word and yet hold high religious positions. Today in many mainline denominations they've become full of people like this who see some benefit to a pastoral position, to the power of the office. They find enjoyment in the recognition that maybe they receive about. Whenever they talk about the need for this or that thing, for justice, usually as the culture defines it, they like being the experts in religion among their friends. But the Scriptures aren't known. God's word is not written in the heart. And so God's power is denied in all of that. And the churches they lead become man-centered, become about social justice, about doing some good in the world, about not judging anyone and that sort of thing. The denial of God's word and his power leads to those kinds of places, to this place we see here in the scripture this morning. You see, nothing's new. This is a place where the religious leaders are powerful men disconnected from those who they are allegedly ministering to, who hate Jesus. And it's these men who ask Jesus a question. Let's look at this question.

Okay, now the question. You can picture it. Maybe some of you have been in a discussion or an argument with somebody before and you think you've got the one that's like really the witty, you know, there's no way that I will lose this argument after I say the next words that fly out of my mouth. This is what's happening here with the Sadducees. They think they're being so witty. It used to be in high school, you know, I'd have an interaction with somebody and they would be talking, we'd talk, maybe about some theological things. And the inevitable question back in that day was, can God make a rock that he couldn't lift? They thought that that sort of, like, unended the entire Gospel and everything by asking the trick question, the witty question. And that's what we see here. There is a cultural reference. The sort of situation that the Sadducees are referring to in their little witty test is dealt with by Moses in Deuteronomy 25. He is regulating a practice that existed before him. He didn't invent it, but basically the idea was that a man marries and he has no children and he dies. And the Mosaic Law commented that the brother of the man should marry the woman in order to honor his brother's name, keep the line going, and so pass down whatever inheritance there might be, property, so on, and preserve a legacy for his brother. And in the process of doing that, care for this woman's needs and protect her. There are two times in the Bible that we see this situation and its application. Once before Moses, this is why we know that Moses was just regulating it. He didn't make it up. Once was before Moses, it was way back, and there was a woman named Tamar, and it's in the book of Genesis, and the same situation sort of occurred, and you can read all about it. And then the other is in the Book of Ruth. In both cases, when it actually was working out in practical outworkings, the person, the brother who's supposed to carry on in this process says, no, no way. Very reluctant to do this thing. And it appears that by the time of Jesus' day that the practice was likely not even in play. It was not a common thing that anybody did. The examples we see in the Bible is everybody saying, yeah, no. And then it seems that in Jesus' day, we have no record of anyone ever actually doing this. But here, with that background.

Here's the comment again. Okay? The Sadducees, they ask him this question. Teacher, there it is. I mean, just the mockery. Teacher, you don't believe it if a man dies having no children, when Moses said this, his brother must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother. That's what you can read in Deuteronomy now. Now, there were seven brothers among us, and the first married and died. And having no offspring, he left his wife to his brother. So too, the second and third, down to the seventh. And after them all, the woman died. In the resurrection, therefore, of the seven, whose wife will she be, for they all had her. Okay, so this question was their clever argument. For why there was no resurrection. It was likely, of course, not a real situation, but a scenario, a trick used to prove a point. Maybe it was a common question that they would present to their Pharisee colleagues when they were trying to prove to them that there was no resurrection. It was meant to show that if there was a resurrection, everything would be chaos. I mean, it would mean that one woman would either have seven husbands all at the same time, which, I mean, who could have that? That would certainly be against God's law, or there would have to be some way in which one of them, one of the seven, would be picked out by God to be the one that would be her resurrection husband, and the others would be sadly left out, which certainly would not be the way that a just God would work. Both of these options were not workable. Therefore, the idea of a resurrection is ridiculous. That's their little scenario. They believe that Jesus will be stumped. They believe that Jesus will be shown by this probing, totally unimportant question. They believe that he will be shown to be an ignorant country preacher and that this upstart can easily be discarded, and that Jesus doesn't understand who he's dealing with when he's standing with the Sadducees. So the trick question's out there, well, how will Jesus respond?

Well, for Christmas, I got a book. It's on growing tomatoes. I'm trying to grow this year a salsa garden. That's what I want to do. But don't ask for any salsa until it's like I actually do it. And I don't know best practices or really any practices. And so I received a book, and it's a book that contains pictures of some of the most beautiful tomatoes that you have ever seen. Of every variety and color, describes the varieties. It provides a large number of recipes. It gives helpful tips on planting and caring for and harvesting your tomatoes. It talks about pest control and the need to control those pests. There's only one thing this awesome book cannot do, and that is it cannot grow tomatoes. With enough reading, I could, of course, become an expert on tomatoes without ever lifting a finger. I could convince you that I know tons about tomatoes and that I could train you on how to grow them. That's the Sadducees. They know the first five books of the Bible. They read them, but they don't know the God of the first five books of the Bible. And so they don't really know the Bible, because if they did, how do we know that they don't know the Bible? Because if they did, they wouldn't ask Jesus stupid questions. And here he is, they're asking this. So Jesus responds to them first with a little bit on the resurrection, a little bit, and then a little bit on marriage, with a deep living knowledge of God's character and work that's at the foundation of it all. So this, let's just talk about this first. Let's talk about the resurrection. He talks about it. He says, you may have read, but you don't understand anything. You haven't listened, you haven't heard. And here it is. Have you not read what was said to you by God? That I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. Haven't you read that? That's part of his comment, just to kind of get him. But then he begins by just saying, you're wrong because you don't know either the scriptures or the power of God. For in the resurrection. And then he goes on, he starts to talk. The resurrection is assumed. I mean, Jesus himself in less than one week away, is less than one week away from his own resurrection. So he's talking about, he said, well, in the resurrection, when we're there, this is what it would be like. He lays his cards on the table. You say there's no resurrection. I don't need to answer your little question. You're just wrong. He just starts going. Jesus then argues that even in the first five books, the teaching of God's word about the reality of a resurrection at least tends towards clarity. The Lord says to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, the God, God of Jacob, basically, that he's a covenant God, that he's not the God of the dead, but of the living. God doesn't refer when he's talking to Moses, he doesn't refer to these three men, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in some nostalgic way, as if they're no longer alive. Even in the first five books, there are strong hints that God's promises for his people don't end at their death. Jesus draws their attention to Abraham. If you thought about Abraham, I'm the God of Abraham. Do you remember this story? I mean, you can just imagine him frustrating these guys. Do you, do you know the story of Abraham? I mean, wasn't Abraham kind of old? Wasn't he as good as dead? Wasn't his wife way beyond child-bearing years? Don't you understand the power of God? The power of God that can bring life out of some place, that there was no way for there to be life. Don't you understand? He's the God of the living. He brought Isaac into the world. He's not the God of the dead.

Look, is God a God who is unable to conquer the greatest obstacle we face? Is he a God of the dead? Is he a God at the end of your life would say, it was nice knowing you. You did a great job. I'm sorry you're dead. He's a God of the living. Jesus saying, if you read and you heard, if you listened, you would know that he is a God of the living who gives life in abundance. If God loves and blesses his people, will those blessings end? Will God's love for you and for me end at death? I mean, if there's no resurrection, what's the point? Like we die in our sins. That was the Apostle Paul's argument. To some of the people in the church of Corinth who actually began to hold this Sadducee position. He says it, he says to the Corinthians, he says, if Christ is proclaimed as raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead? If there's no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised. And if Christ hasn't been raised, then our preaching is in vain. Your faith is in vain. We've even been found to be misrepresenting God because that God raised Christ, whom he didn't raise. If it's true that the dead aren't raised, if the dead aren't raised, not even Christ has been raised. And if Christ hasn't been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your sins. And then those who've fallen asleep in Christ have all perished. If in Christ we have hope, in this life only we are of all people in the world, most to be pitied. That's how Paul responds to it. And then he adds this nice little phrase, but in fact Christ has been raised from the dead in the Resurrection. Jesus is clear there is a resurrection because God is a God of the living, not of the dead. The Sadducees' concept of God's word and power is too limited and it exposes them as ignorant frauds, which they are.

But Jesus also argues that the reason their question is ignorant is because the only conception they can come up with in their minds in terms of the resurrection is one where the current state of things, a continuation of the current state of things, that's the only thing they can think of. The resurrection must just be the same thing, just kind of keeps progressing on a limited small view. And this is why the marriage question they are asking seems to them to be such an awesome stumper. Jesus counters with the comment that in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage. In other words, although the resurrection is related to our life now as something we look forward to, life in the resurrection will be quite different than our life now. We're being resurrected into new life, new heavens, new earth. What will that be like? How does that connect to marriage? Jesus talks about it here, so we should probably at least mention it.

I don't know about you, but people have all kinds of visions of heaven. I imagine you have thought about it occasionally. You've thought about what you think heaven is going to be like. And it's almost universally we think about a place of reunion, right? We're going to reunite with family and friends who've kind of gone before us. You don't want to be a Christian to believe this. I think most people think that there's like a heaven would say that family and friends are kind of around, at least the nice ones, and then there's no more troubles, right? There's no more suffering. So, like, you know, we'll say things like, when a person dies, whether they're Christian or not, a lot of times people will say, well, at least they're not suffering anymore. So the vision, the picture is that there will be no more suffering. In whatever conception people generally and even Christians have of a heaven, it is always a better place. People will say, well, they're in a better place. And so as Christians, you know, we can sort of adopt some of that, some of that, sort of maybe we hold to ourselves. I remember when I was younger and just getting on in marriage, I did not like that Jesus said these words. I don't know if any of you were of the same persuasion as me, but I did not like that he said this. And the reason why I didn't like it was I just. I kind of wanted marriage to. I mean, I've been married for a long time now, but I wanted marriage even at a very early time to continue on and on and on. I thought, well, it's such a good thing. And if I could just get all of my sin tendencies and Jenny's one or two out of the way, we could, you know, we could have a great time together. You would be what you always wanted to be for the other person. And then heaven would be when that would happen. And that was what you had to look forward to in heaven. The most important of your relationships, unimpacted by your sins anymore. And so I had that right. It's a very nice picture, isn't it? Problem is, is that Jesus was kind of he was there, but he might not have been at the center of that picture. And I think sometimes when we think about our own conceptions of heaven or what it will be like when we die, that we have to be honest with ourselves. Is Christ at the center of that picture? My marriage picture was not that Jesus was at the center, but that I was. And how I wanted things to be would finally be the way I wanted things to be. But here is Jesus teaching that marriage is a temporary state. In the resurrection, they neither marry nor given in marriage. How could this be? What we need to ask what's the purpose of marriage? Why did God ordain it in the first place? Well, let's see. It's not good for man to be alone. But I mean you're never going to be alone. You're never going to feel loneliness. It's not something that's. When you're with the Lord, you're never going to be alone. Be fruitful and multiply. But the new heavens and the new earth are no need to be filled. Because everyone who God has called and Christ is there. There's no more need for more people. He's called his full, you know, flock in. Oh, what about of help in time of need and companionship which is so valuable in a difficult sin-filled world and someone to take care of you when you're old. But there is no more sin and there's no more death and you're not going to decline anymore because of age. And so you don't need anyone to take care of you when you're old. What about the most glorious one of all when I do a wedding and I share that. Your marriage is supposed to be picture of Christ and his church to the world. It's the best thing that Jesus says or that the scripture says about what marriage is supposed to be a picture of Christ and his church. Yeah, but Jesus is there and the church. You don't need a picture. It's the reality. So you see, this good institution of marriage given for the blessing and happiness of mankind will pass away. But what awaits relationally is far greater. We'll know each other in a far richer, glorious way. This is true of all we enjoy in this life. All that is good will give way to something greater. Greater blessings beyond our comprehension.

The apostle Paul describes the resurrection like this. He says, if you take a seed, one of my Tomato seeds. And you drop that baby in the ground and you take care of it, what does it become? It does not become a big seed, obviously recognizable as the exact same thing. It becomes this kind of fruitful, marvelous, abundant. Well, hopefully, if everything works out with my book, it becomes this kind of fruitful, fantastic, lovely, abundant tomato plant. Right from a seed. Paul says that's the resurrection. That's what's going to happen to you. I mean, I can't, I can't. I can't get past. I just want a little better version of myself. But God wants to take a seed and make it into something glorious, a plant. A marvelous, fruitful, incredible picture. What a picture. That's what he's making you. Not just a little better version of yourself, not just a little bit happier. That's like a tiny image. It's a tiny picture. He's doing something marvelously beyond that. If you thought, you know, peace, joy, happiness and contentment, now you just wait. And if you thought you knew beauty and magnificent and what it means to feel alive, now you just wait. We have no idea. We cannot conceive of life without death, of life without sorrow, of life without suffering or anxiety or discouragement or anger or lust or envy or pride. We can't even conceive of that. How could we? But for the Christian, it's all coming. It's all coming when we've done our work, when the seeds in the ground, what's coming out is something glorious beyond compare. You know, it's like life. Like a toddler who plays happily. I mean, well in the day. I don't know, maybe it's you probably you choke on it now. So you might not be able to use them, but we used to have these like little play school hammer things, you know, and you bang the little plastic hammer on the little plastic peg. And if you were 2 years old, that was very exciting. You just banged a little plastic hammer, right? And you could entertain yourself for quite some time banging the little plastic hammer. I'd be content with that. But the Lord's not. He doesn't want us just banging play school hammers all of our existence. He wants us building houses. He's moving us to grander and awesome things. Because God is the God of the living and not of the dead. He is a God of power and of glory. Jesus would have us look at God and so look at him, the Son of God, and follow him. The Pharisees and the Herodians, they wanted to talk to him about taxes. And the Sadducees, they wanted to talk about, you know, marriages and strange things that aren't really even followed anymore, like rules and regulations. And Jesus counters both of them by driving them to look at God, render to God the things that are God's. And here in this passage, to see that their vision of God's power and of God's word is so small, so limited, so inconsequential that they are wrong, they shouldn't be paid attention to for a moment. And so they ought to stop talking and listen and look and get to know the one true God, whose powerful word creates a universe. You think he can make something out of you like, this is the God that we worship. He rules over the heavens and the earth. He rules over in the resurrection. And he sent his only Son into the world to be the atonement for sin, to be the fruit, first fruits of that resurrection glory. You know, one day in the resurrection, we will see him. We will see him face to face. And we will know what it's like to build houses instead of banging plastic hammers. And we will know what it's like to be a personal, to be a harvest, to be. To be so fruitful and abundant versus just a single seed. We'll know what it's like to be truly alive before Christ in his perfect kingdom, kingdom versus living for Christ in our own sin, in the midst of a fallen world, working as hard as we can because one day we're going to come to it. We're going to come to the place of rest. We're going to come to the place of always fruitful work, of worship, of relationship. With all barriers broken down that mar all of our relationships in this life. We will come to the place, place of light. We will come to the place of life where there is no more sorrow, where there is no more tears, where there is no more pain. To the kingdom. Not the kingdom that must answer to silly riddles from Jesus' enemies, but the actual kingdom, Christ's kingdom, the glorious kingdom, the kingdom that will never end. And you and I and all those who worship Jesus will be there with him. Praise the Lord. Let's pray.
