**Good morning.** You can turn with me this morning to Matthew, chapter 20. And if you're visiting with us today, we have been walking as a congregation through the Gospel of Matthew. It's the story of Jesus, his works, and his words. And there's a lot going on in this section of the Gospel that we've been working through together for several weeks now. There's this underlying question that has been asked by Jesus' disciples. And the question is basically, what is greatness in the kingdom of heaven? Who is the greatest in the kingdom? And Jesus has tackled this question in a variety of ways, from his words to some hard-hearted religious leaders, to his welcoming little children into his presence, to his interaction with a respectable rich young ruler. Jesus, in all of these interactions, begins to turn things upside down. His disciples are being taught a different way of thinking. They hindered children from coming to Jesus, and Jesus said, "Don't hinder them." They moved out of the way for the rich young ruler and for the religious elites, and yet Jesus seemed perfectly fine with sending the rich young ruler away and the religious elites away as well. Jesus encapsulates much of what he's been teaching his disciples when he says at one point, "But many who are first will be last, and the last first." And last week, to make sure that the rich young ruler is not the first, last week, to make sure that the disciples understood this, he told them a story, a parable. It was a story of a group of workers and of an unusual employer, this master of the house. Jesus made clear through this parable that the kingdom of God operates according to the principle that the last will be first, and the first will be last. Amazingly, it might seem, it just doesn't seem to be getting through as we will see today.

As we come to today's passage, we find Jesus is now beginning his ascent to Jerusalem for the Passover feast. It's a week-long event, and he's with the roads, which would just be packed with pilgrims heading towards Jerusalem, and he's traveling there with a larger group of people. So it's not just he and his disciples; it would be their families, others from their communities around. He's going with this mass towards Jerusalem, and he's heading there to go ultimately to the cross. 

So here are the words of the Lord this morning from Matthew chapter 20, beginning at verse 17. 

"And as Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside, and on the way he said to them, 'See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death and deliver him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged and crucified, and he will be raised on the third day.' Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came up to him with her sons, and kneeling before him, she asked him for something. And he said to her, 'Well, what do you want?' She said to him, 'Say that these two sons of mine are to sit, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your kingdom.' Jesus answered, 'You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I am to drink?' They said to him, 'We are able.' He said to them, 'You will drink my cup, but to sit at my right hand and at my left is not mine to grant. But it is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.' And when the ten heard it, they were indignant at the two brothers, but Jesus called them to him and said, 'You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. It shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you must be your servant, and whoever would be first among you must be your slave, even as the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.' This is God's Word this morning."

Most parents are familiar with sayings that are somewhat like this: "How many times do I need to tell you to pick up after yourself?" or something like that. If you're a child, you know what it's like to be on the receiving end of that, and you don't know the answer to that question. A few more is probably the answer. A child has a habit that a parent is anxious for him or her to break, and so the parent is on him or her about that, emphasizing, "I'd like you to try to work on this habit." Changing the way that we think and the actions that are sure to follow that thinking is a very difficult thing to do. Repetition is required. You can't say it once, and then it's all going to be better. So repetition is required, and we see Jesus once again involved in a discussion about greatness, hammering home this point. And once again in a conversation, we find him talking about what's waiting for him when he arrives in Jerusalem, so that maybe that will sink in to the disciples. But these things aren't just for the disciples; they're for us to consider, because Matthew, in writing his gospel, is writing it for an audience similar to this, in the sense that it's folks who don't necessarily know the entire story, and he wants them to consider those things which he knows we need to have repeated to us as well. These things that Jesus is teaching the disciples, he wants to teach us this morning.

So Jesus begins his travel to the feast week in Jerusalem by explaining to his disciples exactly what he, Jesus, the Christ, the King, what he is going to do. It's not the first time that he's said this to them, but it's the most detailed description he's provided them to date. This time he includes in his description for them the Gentiles, the Romans, and how they're going to fit into the picture. He lays it out. He says, "I'm going to go up to Jerusalem. The Son of Man is going to go up to Jerusalem. I'm going to be delivered over to the chief priests and to the scribes. They will condemn me to death, and then they're going to hand me over to the Romans, and then the Romans are going to mock me, flog me, and then crucify me. And then I will be raised on the third day." He says it just straightforward like that.

Jesus is describing then his upcoming suffering, what he's going to soon refer to in this dialogue with the sons of Zebedee, James and John, and their mother, as his cup, the cup he is going to have to drink. It's the same cup that a bit later in the Garden of Gethsemane he will famously pray about and ask his Father if it might be removed from him, finishing with that statement, "But not my will, but yours be done." So he describes this cup, his suffering, to the disciples on the road. What he's describing isn't exactly new; he's talked about it before, and he is again not heard very well by them. Or maybe the disciples think he's speaking in riddles in some way, but what happens next gives us a picture of where the disciples were in all of this.

Jesus is approached by James and John, the sons of Zebedee, and their mother, who is possibly Jesus' aunt. So it could be a family affair. But Jesus is approached by James, John, and their mother, and she has a request. So Jesus asks her, "Well, what would you like?" And James and John's mother is very straightforward. "I want my sons to sit, one at your right hand and one at your left. Basically, I want them to be your top appointments in your kingdom." 

Now in her mind, of course, this made perfect sense. After all, they were her children. And every mom knows a little bit about what this is about. You can picture the mother thinking that her sons are a little bit better qualified than the other disciples that are hanging around Jesus. Maybe she knows some of the other mothers, and she's had something to say, or she's thought about the way they've done their parenting of their child. And maybe she thought, "Well, see, they don't really know what they're doing, and look how their kid turned out compared to what my sons are like. My sons are good sons." And then maybe she also maybe has a low view of some of them. I mean, Matthew, for example, he's a tax collector. Maybe she never understood why Jesus included him in the first place. He's kind of a Roman, you know, in the past, they would have been sort of Roman sympathizing types. And maybe she's like, "Well, he's really no good." And then there's that zealot guy. He's kind of a bit rough. And the other guys that we don't even know who they are. So certainly, if there was anybody who was going to replace Jesus if something happened to him, it would be my sons. 

This is a mother's love for her sons. I was joking that this one doesn't normally get preached on Mother's Day. It's not a great Mother's Day sermon. But she asks, she asked this question. Now, James and John, of course, are standing there too with her. And Jesus is very clear in his response. He says two things, basically. He says, "You don't even know what you're asking for." That's sort of the first part. And then the second part, he says, "To sit at my right hand or my left hand isn't for me even to grant. It is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father." In saying that it wasn't for him to grant anyway, but that it was his Father's decision, Jesus is again emphasizing what we see throughout Scripture and what we hear him say in the garden. Jesus' concern is always that his Father's will would be done. That's his concern. His Father's will would be done. What is the concern of James, John, and their mother? Is it the Father's will? Is it Christ's glory? No. Their concern is their own glory. And they were asking Jesus, this is what they were asking Jesus to do. They were asking Jesus to use his authority to get what they wanted for themselves. They were ready to use Jesus to gain power.

Now, of course, that is something which can happen today. There have been many men and women who have sought to use Jesus' name, who have used his people to get more power for themselves, whether in terms of admiration, wealth, a spotlight, or some authority. James and John and their mother are no different. But it's not a very pleasant picture of the disciples, especially if you take one moment and think of what Jesus just told them about. He just said, "I'm going to go and I'm going to be flogged, mocked, and crucified." That's going to happen within a couple of weeks of the time of this story. What's on Jesus' mind? His upcoming crucifixion is on his mind. He tells them about it. The suffering that would accompany it, that's on his mind. And then he's approached by James and John and their mother.

Jesus is always gracious, but he's straightforward. He asks them the question, "Are you able to drink the cup that I am to drink?" And they respond, "We are able," proving forever that talk is cheap. These are simple words for them to say. They thought, "Well, I got to say these words, and then we're at the right hand and the left hand. We got there." 

"Are you able?" "We are able." 

Later, it is these two men that we would find asleep in the garden, not watching and praying as Jesus had instructed them to do. And when Jesus is arrested, we find these two men fleeing the scene and going into hiding, not exactly right hand and left hand material. But at this point, maybe they saw Jesus' question as an oath of loyalty. Maybe the cup that they were envisioning is the cup that would be drunk in the presence of their enemies, a victory cup, the kind that's spoken of in Psalm 23, "my cup overflows." And so they say, "Well, yes, of course, we are able to sit with you and drink the cup of victory over all of our enemies."

And of course, they're no different. Peter would later claim that he would never deny Jesus. And the Bible says that all the disciples said the exact same thing. As people, we're very good at making confident assertions. We want to be courageous and loyal. But when push came to shove, they abandoned him. Their own strength and their dreams of authority just simply were not enough.

Now, after the resurrection and the ascension and the pouring out of the Spirit, these same men would in fact drink the cup. Jesus even makes mention of it here. He says, "You will drink my cup." James would be the first of the twelve to be killed. John would later be exiled in prison for good. The cup they would drink would not be exactly like Christ's in that they would not be willingly going to the cross to atone for man's sins, to bear the penalty that others deserve. But a cup of suffering would be given to them to drink. They'd do it. They would do it as those who had been transformed by the Gospel, who had gone from the disciples that we see here in this text to the men that we will meet later in the book of Acts and in the letters of Scripture. Different men, totally changed. And we'll consider how that came about a little later this morning. But Jesus speaks of this cup that he is to drink. He pushes back against James and John and their mother a little bit, and they walk away, and then the fireworks begin. 

The Scripture says that when the ten heard it, they were indignant at the two brothers. Why? Because they cared very much about the glory of Christ and because of where he was going, and they thought, "How could you possibly ask him such a question at a time like this when he's going to be crucified?" Well, no. They're indignant because these two got there first. They weren't happy. The ten all wanted the same thing. There they all are. They're heading up to Jerusalem. It's finally happened. They've hung out around this lake all this time, and now they're finally heading up. For Jesus to take his kingdom, something big is going to happen, and each one wants to be in the place of privilege. Each one is thinking about his own glory and the authority they would have. I mean, of course, when he thinks of his authority, he thinks, "I'll be like David. I'll be a good, you know, I'll be a real good ruler." But he's thinking about his own authority. And so they're angry at James and John and presumably James and John's mother as well for trying to get what belonged to them. 

And we know this is the case because Jesus just looks at all of this, and the Bible is clear, and it says that he called them to him. He just cut it short. Just stop. Let's talk about this again.

It was the summer of my sophomore year in high school, and I was at a Young Life week-long summer camp. There was a speaker there who throughout the week was sharing the Gospel, and on the last evening, they would set aside time when you could go out by yourself and just ask, just think about what had been said. They encourage you to pray to God or if you didn't know him, you know, just to think about that. And I would always have said that I was a Christian, and I think I was, but on that night, I was just thinking through my life and seeing that I really wanted things to go both ways all the time for me. I wanted whatever I wanted. I wanted it to be both ways. At least I was living that way. And that night I remember just committing. I remember asking the Lord just to help me, to just always stick to him, to follow him. That I wanted to follow Jesus, whatever that meant. That I would set aside the way of the world, that I would seek to follow after Jesus' way. The Gospel always lays that choice before us. There is the way of the world and there is the way of the kingdom of God, the way of Jesus. Now individual day-to-day choices that we make are not that stark, and they can be quite complex, but the big choice, it's always there. Who are you going to follow? Are you going to follow Christ or something and someone else?

And Jesus calls his disciples, when he calls them together, he says, "I'm going to lay before you now two kingdoms. Which one are you going to be in?" The first kingdom he speaks of is the world. He says, "You know that the rulers of the Gentiles, like they lorded over them. When he says the Gentiles, they would immediately think of the Romans. You know what it's like out there. The Romans lorded over people. Their great ones exercised authority over them." Power is something that is wielded and desired in this world. People want to be great. That's why politics is always ugly. People want to be great in the world, in the nation, in your local homeowners associations, in your families. Sadly, sometimes in the church, people want to be great. The apostle James writes that we want something and we can't have it, and so we kill and we covet because we don't get what we want. We never ask God, we just take. We are, by nature, people who want things. And the world and all of us, by nature, are selfish and proud and ambitious, and those who are particularly good at it end up being in charge, and they bully and they push people around. These are the great ones that Jesus mentions, and they tend to know it. The rest, who are not the great ones, dream of payback or wishing they were at the top while trying to stay out of the way of the pushing, bullying types. Keeping their head down, not making waves. That's not humility; it's just fear, cowardice, laziness. In other words, not being in charge doesn't make a person humble. It just means that you're not in charge. It can make you greedy, it can make you complain, it can make you a lot of things. You can plot and so on.

And in the scriptures, we have these small pictures of power in the Pharisees. Jesus has been encountering them. Little local power guys. And we see what they're like; they hate Jesus because Jesus is getting in the way of their sort of like rule over their small little populations. We're about to meet Jesus interacting with the bigger powers, Herod and Pilate, and then the chief priests, the top religious officials of the entire nation. Jesus will be engaging with them, and it will not be pretty. Power in the world is the same. It doesn't matter whether it's a democracy, which at least recognizes at some level the need to check power, or a dictatorship. Power just works that way. Men seeking to be like God. Since the beginning, it's been that way. That's the Bible's testimony. There is the first man, Adam, perfectly happy. Given the world, blessed with a relationship with God, a familiarity with him. And yet, under the temptation of Satan, seeking to be like God. No longer content to be the recipient of God's good gifts and to work happily in his kingdom, in his way, he seeks more than what is his to seek. And the fruits of those choices we've lived with ever since. Sin and death enter the world, our relationship with God and one another is shattered, and men now want power to control other men, to be little gods.

And rather than cry out to God for help that our relationship with him and others might be reconciled and restored and healed, we do all we can as people to push him away, to find life in whatever other variety of ways that we can, only to be disappointed again and again and again. And so it is with the kingdom of this world.

Jesus says, "Disciples, this is what it's like. You can be a part of that. Being under the control of others, always striving for power, always wanting to get your own way, selfish ambition and pride and all of that, ruling the roost." That is a way. But I want to show you a different way. He says right here, "You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them and their great ones exercise authority over them, but it shall not be so among you. Whoever would be great among you must be your servant, and whoever must be first among you must be your slave." The word for servant is the same word we get, that word deacon that we use. Deacon, a servant. But a slave is way lower than a deacon. We don't have that office. The lowest position. No longer needing to have any rights of my own at all. Being tied completely to your master's will. Seeking always to consider the interests of others as more important than your own.

Jesus is looking at these twelve men and he's saying the disciple John must be Thaddeus' slave. Peter, you must be Matthew's slave. And Matthew, you must be Peter's. It's the ultimate game of limbo. How low can you go? Taking the lowest position, being the servant, being the slave, that's the call of the Christian. You say there's two worlds you can live in. You can live in two kingdoms. But in my kingdom, we are slaves and servants of one another. That's what we are. That's why he says, "It shall not be so among you. Instead, whoever would be great among you must be your servant. Whoever would be first among you must be your slave."

In a world of celebrity, friends, that seems absolutely impossible. And in our own strength, it is, in fact, impossible. And it isn't how one is seen or even what position they're in. Jesus isn't saying you're not allowed to be like a boss or you're not allowed to be the head of something or you're not allowed to do a good job at your work so that you get rewarded and accomplish something. He's not saying that. It's your entire approach to life that Jesus is getting at here. It is what kingdom they belong to that drives how they will be. Because in that kingdom, humility and meekness will drive everything. It's a willingness to take a low position with purpose. Not because you're afraid. Not out of incompetence. Not out of laziness. But humbling oneself for the glory of God and for the good of others. Always.

And Jesus is not talking about what sometimes in business or politics today might be called servant leadership. That's a term that is one of those crafty schemes, in my view, of the devil, to turn servanthood into a pathway for personal power. To serve others so that you can squeeze more production or admiration out of them. Servant leadership. To be a servant like Absalom in the Old Testament, in King David's day. Serving everyone around him so he could become well-liked and then take over the kingdom. In Christ's kingdom, there is no using Jesus. There is no using servanthood. There is no using the Bible to get what you want. To get things to go your way. All pride, all selfish ambition, everything must go. There is no place for any of this in Christ's kingdom. All we do must be for Christ's glory. His glory must be in our vision and in our view.

And that's where we'll leave it for now. If you want to hear more about this transformative journey towards genuine humility and service in the kingdom, I recommend diving into the rest of the sermon or exploring the Gospel of Matthew further. Remember, understanding these teachings isn't just about hearing them; it's about living them out. But let's end with a prayer, as was intended:

"Let's pray."