Will entail a good bit of difficulty. The Gospel of Matthew, as it progresses, begins to emphasize something that's going on in Jesus' life, and that is a growing conflict between Jesus and the religious leaders of his day. Last week, we looked at two confrontations that Jesus had with the religious leaders, and they centered on the keeping of the Sabbath. Things are heating up. The end of the text from last week described the Pharisees like this: 'The Pharisees went out from the synagogue and conspired against him, how to destroy him.' So you kinda can't have more animosity than that, an animosity that desires to destroy the other individual. The scripture then says that Jesus, aware of this, withdrew from there. He knows their hearts. He perceives their plots. His mission, however, is greater than simply putting them in their place or defending his reputation. He had come to save his people, and the time hadn't come yet. So he withdrew. We find out today what happened when he withdrew and how his approach to the threats of the Pharisees is in line with how the prophet Isaiah spoke of the one who was to come, the Messiah, the Christ.

So hear the word of the Lord now, Matthew chapter 12, beginning at verse 15: Jesus, aware of this, withdrew from there, and many followed him, and he healed them all and ordered them not to make him known. This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah: 'Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved, with whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my spirit upon him, and he will proclaim justice to the Gentiles. He will not quarrel or cry aloud, nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets. A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not quench until he brings justice to victory. And in his name, the Gentiles will hope.'

This is the word of the Lord this morning. When I was in high school at Bel Air, eventually you get to your senior year, well, most get to their senior year, and then there's this sort of yearbook thing that is put together. And with the yearbook in the senior world are always the senior superlatives. Some of you may remember this from your high school days. This is where you say that you know the person who was most school-spirited or most, and the one I always, what I always liked, I didn't win this, it was most likely to succeed. Okay. Some of you may remember who in your class was the most likely to succeed. No one, they're at least kind enough not to do the most likely to fail, but the most likely to succeed person. And I picture now the teenagers sitting in the room and evaluating their peers and which one of their peers is the most likely to succeed, and upon what is that based? Maybe it's based on their looks, or maybe on their social status, where they are on the ladder, or maybe on athletic or academic success. It's just an exercise in looking and thinking and evaluating and then predicting who is most likely to succeed in the future. It's kind of after-the-fact type stuff. The prophets in the Bible, we can get sort of confused because sometimes people think, well, prophets, like, that's what they do, they're predicting the future. But they're never predicting anything. Prophets don't predict; they just proclaim. They tell you what exactly is going to happen. It's not a prediction based on looks and social status, academic, athletic success. They proclaim what the Lord has in mind, and so we talk about fulfillment of something like they do in the Bible today. It's just fulfilling what God says must be. This must be. This is going to happen. There's no 'maybe it will be the case, maybe it won't.' It must be. The yearbook predictions can be off. God's Word is never off. It's always correct.

Jesus withdraws, people follow him, he heals them, and then he orders them to keep it quiet. And that little bit right there, the Bible describes as fulfilling what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah. So I thought we would talk about that. It's a quote actually from Isaiah 42. You can read that later if you'd like to, but in the context of Isaiah 42, a couple of things are going on. If you look back at Isaiah, what you would see is that the Lord is declaring through Isaiah to his people, he's saying, 'I'm about to do some new things. I'm going to do some new things,' and then he rails on how just awful idolatry is, how dumb it is to worship idols. But he goes on and says, 'I'm going to do some new things,' and what we see as we read Isaiah 42 and then here is that the new things the Lord is going to do, the great things he has planned for the world, he's going to bring about through a new person, someone who he is going to bring onto the scene. And he describes this person, and that's what we have with us this morning: 'Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved, with whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my spirit upon him.' This is a description of who this person is. Behold, look at him. Let me tell you about him. The first thing I want to tell you about him is that he is my chosen servant. He's chosen by God, and he's going to be a servant. One of the things that we see, which is really a remarkable sort of change in the way that maybe like yearbook theology works, is that the person who you would think would be the king in the Bible always ends up not really being the one who is the good king. It's not based on the things that the world evaluates people on. So here God says, 'My king, the one I'm bringing to do the new things, he is a servant.' We find out elsewhere that he is a suffering servant. Jesus is not merely coming as a conquering king; he's coming as a suffering servant. Jesus says later to his disciples, he called them to him because they were arguing. They were having a yearbook conversation on which one of them was most likely to succeed. And Jesus says this to them: 'You know that the rulers of the Gentiles, they lord it over them. They do this kind of stuff that you're doing right now. And their great ones exercise authority over them. It shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you must be your servant, and whoever would be first among you must be your slave, even as the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many.' The identity of this person who would fulfill God's plan for all of history would be someone who would be a chosen servant. But that's not all. He also speaks of him as his beloved, as a beloved son. Jesus is the Son of God. He is the Father's beloved Son. He says that twice in Matthew at Jesus' baptism, 'This is my beloved Son with whom I am well pleased.' And then later in the Gospel of Matthew, at the transfiguration, what we call the transfiguration, the Father says, 'This is my beloved Son with whom I am well pleased. Listen to him.' So he's not only the chosen servant; he's the beloved Son, and God is pleased with him. And then he's also filled with the Spirit. 'I will put my spirit upon him.' That's going to be challenged very soon. That's going to be a source of great contention because Jesus is going to heal a demon-possessed man, and the Pharisees are going to say, 'Well, the only reason why he can do that is because he himself has a demon in him. He's doing that by the prince of demons.' And Jesus is going to argue with them. And one of his arguments, he says this: 'You need to understand if it's by the Spirit of God that I'm doing these things, then the kingdom of God has come.' He's referencing back here again. Understand if the new things that God is doing, if the great things, if the kingdom is coming into the world to change all things, then that means that the King has to come. And one of the things that is the mark of the King is that 'I'm going to put my spirit on him.' Jesus is declaring that God's Spirit, which we see descending on him at baptism and resting on him, is working in him for the blessing and healing and encouragement of God's people. That's his identity. A servant, a son, a spirit is on him. And that three-fold identity of servant and son and spirit is given to all who come to Christ. We are, the Bible says, servants of the living God. You are in Christ a servant of God. You're like Christ. We are, the Bible says, beloved children of God. You are sons and daughters of God in Christ. And we are, the Bible says, we have as Christians received the gift of the Holy Spirit, who fills us, strengthens us, empowers us, bears fruit in our lives, and always is pointing us to Jesus. That's our identity. That's who we are. We're servants. We're children of God. We're filled with his Spirit. It's a Christian. We're like Christ. That identity needs to be remembered by all of us and then lived out. Because that's what we see Jesus doing here. His identity leads to a way of life. And we're going to take a look at that.

You know, people's last names, they often describe a type of work. Like last night we were at a wedding of a Miller. What's the last name? Miller. And Smith, of course, is something. And then Taylor. But as generations pass, those with these last names become sort of removed from that first

 generation or so and that actually did those things. So in other words, if you go to Home Depot or to your local sawmill, probably the person you talk to, their last name will not be Miller. And probably when you go to get something done at the dry cleaner for your clothes, you're not going to meet somebody whose last name is Taylor. You're not tailoring your clothes anymore. Few Millers work at a mill, Smiths at a Smith, and if you take your clothes to be tailored, it's likely not a Taylor who's going to do the work. But Jesus is the first generation of this identity, chosen servant, beloved son, spirit-filled man. He actually lived out exactly what those things mean. If you want to know what it means to be a Christian, to be like Christ, you look at Christ. He lives out this way. He has a way about him. The outworkings of that way are described in the beginning of our text. When it says that Jesus, aware of this, withdrew from there, and many followed him, and he healed them all, and he ordered them not to make him known. Jesus withdrew. We don't think much about that. I think when we read through the Bible, we say, 'Well, yeah, he departed,' but when he withdrew from Capernaum, he left them to their own devices. In other words, the leaders there were plotting to kill him, so he left them to figure out how they were going to do all of that. What a tragedy it would be to live in a place where the King came. Then he chose, because of the way that he was treated, to withdraw from your place. But Jesus quietly withdrew. He withdrew from Capernaum, and then the nature of the way of Jesus is described in this text from Isaiah. The first thing we see is that he proclaims, and he will proclaim justice to the Gentiles. When we think of justice, we usually think of the court system and getting the guilty guy guilty and the innocent people innocent. But really, that idea in the Bible is not just calling the wicked to account and punishing them. Justice is putting on display everything that's good and righteous in the world. A just society is one where goodness and righteousness are shining everywhere. So it's not just stopping wicked people from doing wicked things. That's not justice in the Bible sense. That's part of it. But the bigger part is that it's just this goodness and righteousness are just shining in the world. Jesus is proclaiming, it says, justice to the Gentiles, to the world, to the whole world. He's proclaiming what goodness and righteousness look like, what his kingdom is going to be like to everyone. He's proclaiming this gospel. He's not hiding away from, he's not downplaying wickedness. He's not saying, 'Don't worry about it however you want.' He's saying, 'You've got to repent of that, but let me paint you the picture. Justice.' He's going to be proclaiming. So the first thing that Jesus does, the nature of the way of Jesus is proclamation.

The second thing is another kind of very un-American quality. Jesus is quiet. The Bible says that he will not quarrel or cry aloud. Now, I don't know. I don't know what it would be like. I don't know whether Jesus would ever enter into any of the online discussions that people enter into. I have no idea. What I know is that his goal is never to just get his side out there, to quarrel for quarreling's sake. He's not a quarreller. He doesn't cry aloud. He's not arrogant. He's not brash. He's not a loudmouth. No one will hear his voice in the streets. In other words, if you want to hear Jesus, you're going to have to come to him because he's not going to shout at you. He's not going to tell you what you have to do. But if you come to him, he's going to proclaim things to you. But he's quiet. He's not going to quarrel or cry out loud. No one was going to hear his voice in the street. He's not arrogant, brash. He's humble. He's gentle.

But then there's this next piece. It says, 'A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not quench.' Reeds were used for a variety of purposes, but they had to be strong for them to be used in the ancient world. And a bruised reed was of no use at all. And so it would be broken. Jesus was very familiar with bruised reeds. Elsewhere, he called them weary and burdened people. Or he looked out the crowd, and he saw them like sheep without a shepherd who were harassed and helpless. And the reed reads, smoldering wicks, he won't quench. It's the same sort of idea. Jesus is gentle and humble and full of compassion. 'Take my yoke upon you and learn from me,' he says, 'for I am gentle, I am lowly in heart.' He proclaims, and he does it in a way that's quiet, and he's full of compassion for people in all of their whatever state they're in. The way of Jesus stood in stark contrast to the way of the Pharisees, who would tell you what to do, who clearly were interested if anybody disagreed with them to initiate conflict and to pick fights. I was trying to think of the only exception I can think of. This is when Jesus cleansed the temple, where he went in and he sort of started things. For the most part, it was always the conflict that started somewhere else when they would approach him. He doesn't pick fights. He cares about the bruised reed and the smoldering wick. And maybe that's worth thinking about this morning. Maybe you are bruised reed. You're bruised. You're smoldering. You're bruised by general cares of life. The burdens of illness, the burdens of just mental struggle. The burdens of loneliness and anxiety and depression. The burdens of relational difficulties that go on and on. The burdens of fixing things that are broken. The burdens of having to get up each day and do it all again. The burdens of wanting your children to succeed or be appreciated, and for whatever reason, that's not happening. And so you feel that burden acutely yourself. Or maybe you're bruised by the burden of sin. That picture of being helpless and harassed is a picture that you see in your life. You've been abused by others or you've been abusing others, and you're burdened by that. And you've tried multiple ways to sort of fix those bruises over your life. You've self-medicated in one of the half-billion ways that you're given in our world to do that. Maybe even today you wander a little bit without hope. You're damaged. Maybe you're resistant to change. Keeping God's grace at arm's length is hard. You don't feel like you have much left. You're a smoldering wick. The idea of being the light of the world seems a little removed from your personal experience. Christ will not break you. And Christ won't take whatever smoldering little bit you have left. He will not quench you. He will not snuff you out. Christ will treat you with gentleness and compassion. He would encourage you with His word, strengthen you by His Spirit. Because He didn't love you because you were useful. I mean, that's the difference between the world and Jesus. If you're a broken reed and you're not pulling your weight in your job, you can lose your job. Jesus isn't interested in using you. He loves you. Gentleness, compassion, a bruised reed. He won't break. A smoldering wick. He doesn't snuff out. He doesn't quench.

I think also there's a picture here that's worth thinking about. The truth is because Jesus is like that, He never forces Himself on anybody. He's just not aggressive. He's not pushy. He's not a bully. He's just Himself. It's not His way. It's not what He's like. But one day, He will withdraw. Like if a person pushes Christ away again and again and again and again, like there is a day where He withdraws. So don't push Christ away. Don't suffer the tragedy of His withdrawing from you. Come to Him. If you don't know Him this morning, come to Him. In Him, there is only forgiveness and eternal life. In Him, that's what there is. And I hope that you hear that you don't have to come to Him like in some sort of perfect, good state because He doesn't break bruised reeds. He doesn't quench out smoldering wicks. He receives them. Now for us, many of us, most of us probably who are Christians, we see here that His way is to be our way. We're to seek and strive to live up to the name that we have been given. His Spirit, which is alive and well, has made it possible that unlike Millers and Smiths and Taylors, Christians are still following Christ's way after 2,000 plus years. You know, the Miller doesn't have the Spirit of God making the next Miller a Miller. He has whatever he passes down. Christians, God's Spirit has made it possible we're still following Christ's way. May it be that way with us. May we be those who proclaim the gospel with a quiet compassion for other people, remembering that Jesus isn't only the way to God, which He is, but He shows us the way to live. Jesus' identity as a servant and son and filled with the Spirit is lived out in a certain way, this way that we see, and that way leads to victory.

This last weekend, I had the privilege of going and seeing the Meyerhoff girls in a play that they were a part of. And in this play, sort of the idea was you were in the world of Harry Potter and that whole series. But it

 wasn't really about him at all. It was a play about the nature of secondary characters, like the people in a play or in a movie that die, and you don't really know their names, or they have like one line in the movie. So it was a play that sort of explored the idea of what would it be to be a secondary character, somebody who's sort of reluctantly fighting by the hero's side and then just gets killed. I liked the idea, actually. It was kind of interesting in that. And because I thought to myself, well, there is a sense where, like all of us, this is our life, which is what the person who wrote the play saw, which is that we are secondary characters, every single one of us, secondary characters. Jesus is the primary character. He's the center of everything. This is what Isaiah is proclaiming and must be. Jesus is at the center. And our text says that He will bring justice, His kingdom, the goodness, the righteousness of God. He is going to bring that to victory. And in His name, the Gentiles will hope. Evil and wickedness are coming to an end. The righteousness and the goodness of God are going to stand forever because His kingdom is without end, and His kingdom is going to stand forever. And so it is His name, in the name of Jesus, that all of the world can place their hope. That is great news for our world that puts its hope in some of the dumbest things you can imagine. In a world full of secondary characters, bruised reeds and smoldering wicks all over the place, there is a name in whom we can place our hope. And the Scriptures' declaration is that in Christ, broken and smoldering as we are, we are champions, we are victors because He is. Death and sin and the world and our enemy, the devil, will not have the last say in our lives. We are on the winning team. We are secondary characters made glorious by our Savior. It is true that as we're told a lot by our world that, like, we all have a story and people should listen to our story and those kinds of things. Fine, that's all true. But we're not the center of the story. Christ is the center of the story. He's always the center.

I got a picture of it last night. Last night, we were at this wedding, the Miller wedding, with friends. And as is common now, there is this one dance that they always do when the dancing time comes. And it's where they have everybody who's been married, they all get out on the dance floor. And then they say, 'Okay, if anybody's been married for less than a day, step off the dance floor.' And everybody chuckles because, of course, that's the bridegroom. And then they sort of work their way out, right? And this is also, like, a good way of determining how old you are. Because as you're standing there, you know, and now Jenny and I are standing there, you know, longer and longer. We're like, okay. Eventually, they clear out, you know, those who have been 30 years or more and 35 years or more, you know. And finally, they get, usually, to somebody, an elderly couple who've been married for 60 or so years, are left, a set of grandparents, great-grandparents, you know, they're left in the middle all by themselves. And they're dancing together. And the whole place, you know, is sort of surrounding in a big circle. And then everybody just smiles and cheers. Jesus is the king. We're the secondary characters. But we're all at the wedding. We're all victorious in Him. He's invited us. We're there. And one day, the music's going to be playing, and the King of Glory is going to come in. And the crowd's going to be parting. And there's just going to be one man standing in the middle, the chosen servant, the beloved son, the Spirit-filled Christ, the king. And he stands there, and the cheers begin, and there's the roar of the people because the hope of the world is going to be standing right there in our midst. And everybody's going to smile because there'll be joy, peace, rest, and not for a moment, but forever.

Let's pray. Father in heaven, we're grateful, grateful that you have given us hope in Christ, that you have sent your beloved son, your chosen servant, to save us. Holy Spirit, we are grateful for your work in us, pointing us to Jesus. Help us to live lives of quiet proclamation of your gospel, showing compassion towards the bruised reeds and smoldering wicks all around us every day. And help us to remember the joy it is to be united to Christ in his victory over sin and death. May we glorify and enjoy you, oh Lord, forever and ever. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray these things. Amen.