Well, you can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 10. We'll begin at verse 34 today. Together we've been looking in the Bible at the Gospel of Matthew. If you're visiting with us this morning, that's what we've been doing. It tells us the story of Jesus. We have been talking about it for some time now because Christ does. Jesus calls people to follow after Him. That's what He does. He's come, and He's calling you and me to follow Him. The Bible talks about, well, why? Why should we do that? It spends time engaging with Jesus' demonstration of both the desirability and the wisdom of following Him by showing us His authority over all kinds of things. So it shows, the Bible teaches and shows us the authority that Jesus has over the sick, over sickness. He heals the sick. And we learn that whenever He speaks, people will talk about how, oh, look, He's teaching with authority as someone who knows what He's talking about. And He demonstrates His authority over all of creation by calming a storm. And He demonstrates His authority over the forces of evil and darkness in casting out demons. And He demonstrates His authority over sin and even death itself in raising a young girl from the dead and forgiving a man's sin. In all of this and in other healings, Jesus is demonstrating that He is the Messiah, the Christ, the King. He has all authority. The Bible tells us that because of these things that He was doing, His fame sort of grew, spread, and people came from everywhere, as you can imagine, to hear Him talk and to be healed. And so crowds were always gathering around Him. And when Jesus saw them, He would see shepherdless sheep who needed laborers to bring in this harvest of these shepherdless sheep who were hopeless and helpless, and to bring them hope and help in Christ. So He calls His apostles and the 12, and He gives them authority to preach and to heal in His name. And then He gives them the details. And that's where we are now in the book. He's saying, okay, I want to send you out to be among the people preaching and proclaiming and healing discipleship. You're my disciples. You're my followers. Let me tell you about what that's going to be like, how it's going to work. And we looked at three words that capture very well discipleship: go, to go into the world, to live out your life; to beware that it's not going to be easy and there's going to be opposition; and then to endure, to last all the way to the end. We've considered how being a disciple is going to be hard and that when we find out actually how hard it is, one of the things that might happen is that we might become afraid. We might find ourselves in a situation where it's difficult to be a Christian and to stand. We might be afraid. So last week we saw Jesus providing these reasons to not be afraid. And then He continues and kind of concludes His teaching on discipleship this morning. He's going to speak to us about swords and He's going to speak to us about rewards. Hear the word of the Lord starting at Matthew 10, verse 34: "Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I have not come to bring peace, but a sword. For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. And a person's enemies will be those of his own household. Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And whoever does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me. Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it. Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me. The one who receives a prophet because he is a prophet will receive a prophet's reward, and the one who receives a righteous person because he's a righteous person will receive a righteous person's reward. And whoever gives one of these little ones even a cup of cold water because he's a disciple, truly I say to you, he will by no means lose his reward." And when Jesus had finished instructing his 12 disciples, he went on from there to teach and preach in their cities. This is the word of the Lord this morning. We live every day with expectations. You all have expectations. I have expectations. If you're heading into a vacation, you have an expectation of what that might be like. Maybe you're joining a group, a club, or something like that. You have an expectation of what that's going to be like. You've taken a new job. You have thoughts. You have an expectation of what this new job will be like. You have a new child. There's an expectation of what it will be like to raise a child. This is what I think it will be like. Only rarely are you right. If you think about everything that you've had expectations about, there may be occasions where you really actually pegged it. But for the most part, we live a life of expectations where life fails to meet our expectations, or in some situations, actually we expected something to be a lot worse than what it turned out to be. It actually exceeded our expectations. It was a little better than what we thought. Jesus' disciples and particularly the apostles are full of expectations. How could they not be full of expectations? Jesus has given them the authority to heal disease, and He's given them the authority to teach and proclaim about the coming kingdom of God, that the kingdom of God is present with them. And He's given them the power to actually raise the dead in His name. He says, I want you to go into these towns and cities in the area where you're ministering, and I want you to do these things. This is your work. And not only would this authority come with some expectations, in other words, what they expect it to be like when they go out there, it would also come with these thoughts that were kind of bubbling in their minds. Is this the one? Is this the Christ? Is Jesus the Messiah? And with that would, of course, flood in an entire other set of expectations. Because if that was true, then what they were going to experience in their lifetime was the end of Roman occupation and a new era of rule where the Messiah would take up His throne in Jerusalem and that there would be peace on earth, or at least their little section of the earth. That was their expectation. If He's the Christ, this is what's happening. That's on top of the expectations of now that we're going out with this incredible power and authority, boy, I wonder, I can't wait to see how the people will respond to us in our new coolness, you know? There is an expectation. Even today, a man or a woman becomes a Christian, and they come with their expectations of what that will be like. They've come because maybe they were dead in their sin and they were very aware of that fact, and they've come to Christ. Or they've lost their way and they realize that they're sort of lost and hopeless, and so they come to Christ. They're suffering under some difficulty. And a Christian friend invites them to church, and they come to Christ. Or because they've never known any other way, and then finally after years and years, it just sort of has kicked in. When they have embraced Christ as they were taught when they were young, people come with expectations. If my life as a young Christian child, as mine was, was relatively pain-free and fairly happy, then my expectation is that my Christian life is going to be the same. If I came to Christ to escape some sort of sin or trouble, my expectation is that the Christian life will be the life where I no longer have to deal with that sin or with that trouble. I have expectations. Jesus, of course, knows all this, so He speaks to the expectations of His disciples. And this is what He says: "Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth. Here's what you're not supposed to think." I mean, He knows exactly what they're thinking. And so He says, "Don't think that. Here's what's not going to end. The Roman occupation is not going to end. You're all going to die before the Roman occupation ends. In fact, it's going to last, as we know historically, several hundred years past you. War is going to continue. The occupation is going to continue. Your lives, even though I've given you the authority to do these things, are not going to be comfortable, and they are not going to be easy. Do not think that I came to bring peace to the earth." It sounds so non-Christmasy. Jesus then says, "But instead, what I want you to think is this. I have not come to bring peace, but a sword." That's what the gospel will do. Think conflict. The proclamation that Jesus is the King, who everyone must submit to, is a sword. He goes on, "I have come to set a son against his father. And I have come to set a daughter against her mother. And I have come to the earth to set a daughter-in-law against a mother-in-law." I'm not quite sure why that one's included. That one usually goes pretty easily. "But I have come to set a son against a father and a daughter against a mother and a daughter-in-law against a mother-in-law. And a person's enemies will be those of his own household." Now this saying that Jesus has just given us there is actually from the Old Testament, from the prophet Micah. And He's saying something that would have been understood. It's actually a claim to be the Christ, to be the Messiah, because there was this sort of understanding that there were these woes, difficulties that would come in the age when the Messiah came

. And this was one of the sets of difficulties. Son against father, daughter against mother, daughter-in-law against mother-in-law, and a person's enemies will be those of his own household. Has the gospel divided your family? Do some of you here know what it's like when you're the Christian and not everybody's super excited about that? Do some of you know what it's like when you're holding the gospel but a child who you have loved and raised has walked away from the faith? Jesus says the gospel is a sword. It will divide. The gospel can divide the closest human relationships. Don't think that I came to bring peace to the earth. I did not come to bring peace to the earth, Jesus said. I came to bring a sword. Well, what does that mean about your families? Well, helpfully, Jesus tells you exactly what it means with respect to your families. He says this, "Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." That's the bottom line. Jesus lays it out right there. Jesus isn't saying don't love your father and mother or don't honor your father and mother. He's not saying that. What He's saying is that your first love must be Jesus. Over even the deepest human relationships that you have, your first love must be Jesus. That, of course, is a remarkable statement that would bring offense to probably most of the people that were listening, and if thought about carefully, would probably bring offense to most people today. Blood is thicker than water. He's saying, Jesus is saying I'm thicker than blood. Even the most intimate of relationships must not be of greater importance to us than our relationship with Christ. If a person made such a claim on you and it was not Jesus, you would say that's crazy. You would say what a narcissist. Like you've got to be the center of everything? You would say that such a person was despotic, was cruel, crazy. But of course Jesus is none of these things. He is the Christ. He is the Savior of sinners. He is the one who is both God and man, and He is the one that one day every knee will bow before and every tongue will confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. He is the one who holds your eternal destiny in His hands, and so He says, if your dad or your mom or your child is more important than me, then you're not worthy of me. Now that's a sword. Because who doesn't love their kids? Who doesn't desire a blessing on those who have loved them? Who doesn't think the highest of a loving father, a loving mother has a high, you have a high regard? If you grew up in that environment, you have a high regard for them. If you've been a loving father and a loving or loving mother, your children have a high regard for you, and that'll grow over time. It's a sword. Jesus must be your first love. And I'm not saying that just for any other reason than Jesus Himself says that to you today. Well, that's what it means with respect to your family relationships, and then it also means something with respect to your life because He goes on. He doesn't let that, I mean, He probably let that sit a little bit, but then He goes on, and He says, "Whoever does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me." There it is, the cross. Now Jesus hasn't even gone to the cross yet. That doesn't mean He's not talking about Himself at this point. He's just telling them. He's painting a picture for them that they would know from their life. They're occupied. They would see people crucified. They knew what that torturous punishment was in an occupied country. They knew what that was like. It's a picture of brutality and torture and suffering and death, and He says, reset your expectations. Unless you're willing to take up your cross, unless you are willing to suffer and die for me, then you're not worthy of me. Are you willing to suffer even to die for Christ? That's the question we have to ask ourselves. Each day we must recommit our life to Him, to praying, listening to His words, striving to obey, to be just like Him because why? Because Jesus says, "Whoever does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me." Because of course, to follow Him means that you would be willing to take up your cross because He was. So that He kind of can finish up His thought on all of this, He adds this. He says, "Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it." Jesus is calling us away from preserving or prolonging. I know there's a blank there, so you can fill it with either one. Our life at all costs in a desperate push to never die. We will do anything just to keep things going. As a world, we keep anything. Example, online, I love this. You can find the help that you need. So I'm giving you, you know, this is extra special for you. You need to live to 100. Because if this is all there is, you better maximize. And so here you go. All you need to do is move naturally, reduce your stress, and practice the 80% diet rule, which is to stop eating when you're 80% full. How do you evaluate that? Anyway, and then you need to favor a plant-based diet, drink alcohol in moderate amounts, whatever that means, and then put your family first. And keep a social circle that supports healthy behaviors. And you can prolong your life to 100. Sounds like fun, doesn't it? You can find your life. Just keep it going. Or maybe just not just striving for longevity, but we can try to find our life in anything that doesn't ultimately satisfy. You can put all your eggs in good baskets. You can say my life is about my family. Everything is about my family. That might be like the biggest challenge for people, right? Who have warm and good family relationships. My life, I'm putting all my bags of eggs in that basket, but Jesus talks about that basket. We can't have it all there. And you can't have all of your, find all of your life in your country, or in your fortune, or in your status, or in your accomplishments, or in the desires of the flesh and the eyes like Jesus talks about elsewhere. We can't find our life in things that ultimately don't give life. All of this finding our life allows us to see life as our life. I am my own. And so I want to do things how I want to do things. I want it to work. I expect it to work my way. But life is found, Jesus says, in losing all of that and the accompanying thought, I am my own and surrendering my life to Christ and doing all for Christ's sake, declaring that I belong to Him and rejoicing for where He is, life really is. Jesus says it like this, "Whoever loses his life for my sake will find it." And here is where peace actually enters in, where Jesus says, "In the world you'll have tribulation, but take heart, I have overcome the world." There is peace for the believer. It's just not the kind of peace that the apostles expected. So what will you do with all that? People may think that being a Christian is sort of a nice add-on to one's life, that Jesus will make us feel better, will help us to have better relationships with others. If we follow some Jesus steps, we'll be happier and we'll have peace. But Jesus says do not think like this. Reset your expectations. There will be conflict. You should expect it. And expect it even from those who are closest. We must count the cost. There is no Christian life without counting the cost. If you would follow Jesus, there is no easy life. There is no comfortably religious exempt from the cross and from difficulty life that is out there for you. You must follow Him as your first and wholehearted love. You must deny a life of doing what I want and trying to prolong everything for forever and surrender to a better, if in many ways more difficult, life of repentance for sin, faith in Christ, and obedience to His call of service to God and to others. Life in Christ is true life. For Him alone will you ultimately have peace, for once you belong to Christ, no one can snatch you away. You are His. But you must count the cost. Don't think He came to make you happy and to make it easy. Maybe hearing these expectations and this talk of difficulty and crosses was discouraging to the disciples. Do you think? Maybe it's discouraging to you. Jesus just doesn't stay there, though. He wants them to know the great blessing they have and the great blessing they will bring to others because of their union with Him. When I was in middle school, I played rec league basketball. I love basketball. It's the sport I love the most, and I was pretty good at it. And so I usually, during any game, would score a bunch of points. My brother hated basketball so far as I could tell. I think playing, even ever getting out onto the court, was just a horrible chore for him. But my parents, you know, now I'm seeing as a parent I think more for efficiency than anything else, said you both are on the same team and this is what we're doing for a sport, and we're going to play basketball. So my brother, while I was having a great time, he was suffering day after day. I feel for him. He didn't get in the game much. He didn't usually get the ball if he did, and he rarely ever scored. Our team was good that year that we played on the same one, and we were in the championship game, and we lost that game. But it was a

 good year, and being young, we all were excited because at the end, they take you out on the court and then they hand you trophies. So there we all were standing together, and of course, then they handed me a trophy and they handed my brother a trophy. And one of the things that I think they get right actually is that those trophies were no different because we were on the same team. You know, when you come to faith in Christ, you are bringing very little to the table if I can be, sorry. You're bringing very little to the table. In fact, the Bible seems to suggest that because of our sin, in some ways we bring negative things to the table. It's like we, in basketball, we shoot at the wrong hoop. We score points for the wrong team. And yet here, in this remarkable set of statements that basically say we are on the same team as Jesus, and because of that, we're on the same team with our Father in Heaven, it's really amazing. No one could say about themselves, I mean, and if you did, you would be like rejected by every friend that you've ever had. You would not come into a room and say something like, you know, I have not come to bring peace on earth. Like, what a strange person. But a sword. But Jesus said that. And He did that. He wanted us to know that He was coming to shake up the world. Which He did. And by His grace, He chooses to connect Himself with people who have a difficult time keeping the grass mowed, much less bringing peace or a sword to all the earth. Here's the principle. Jesus says, "Whoever receives you receives me." They're about to go about preaching and teaching the kingdom of the gospel of the kingdom, and Jesus encourages them with these closing words. We are on the same team. When they receive you, they have received me. It's a declaration of our union with Christ. It's one of the most beautiful things about being a Christian. That you are united to Christ. It's a clear statement that we cannot be torn apart from Him, even when we are kind of doing our sinful thing. If people receive us as Christians, sinners as we are, whenever we're received, they're receiving Jesus. That's what He's saying. Maybe we should take a pause here and look at what does it mean to actually receive someone. The meaning of the word here is more than what we do and we receive a package from Amazon and you kind of put it inside the house and you open it whenever you feel like you want to open it. To receive someone in the Bible means to welcome them, to receive them with a certain warmth and personal engagement. So it's a warm word to receive someone, to show them hospitality, to welcome them into your life. We go out into the world and people find out that we're Christians through either our overt statements that we are or through the way that we live our life, and they sort of discover it. You know, if you've been a Christian a while, you know that those are the two ways. And they show us one of two things. Either they show us hostility and apathy or they receive us. The principle continues. It says, "Oh, whoever receives me receives him who sent me." The relationship with the Father and the Son is intimate. I and the Father are one, Jesus says elsewhere. So He's able to encourage His disciples that they can call God Father because, you know, whoever receives Jesus as they have receives the Father as well. And there's more. He says, "The one who receives a prophet because he's a prophet will receive a prophet's reward." A prophet's reward. You know, if you receive someone like Elijah or Elisha, things are good. You warmly welcome them into your home and you'd receive, if you look in the Bible, you'd see things like you would receive truth and blessing and the good news of the gospel and in some cases, you would even receive death to life. The prophet's reward for the warmth that was of receiving them was that in both of those cases, there were deaths in the family that then Elisha and Elijah, there was life brought in God's name. And if you receive a righteous man, He says, because he's a righteous man, you'll receive a righteous person's reward. A righteous man comes into your home and you're showing hospitality, and what do you receive? Well, a good man like that, you're going to receive the reward of friendship and humility and care and goodness. Well, sometimes we talk about the righteousness of Christ and that picture of His righteousness not being in some sort of just legalistic, it's legal, it's a legal term, but not just legalistic, like He just followed all the rules. A person who actually follows all the rules, you get all these other things with it. A good, caring friendship, humble. And so if you receive Jesus, you see, you receive the prophet and the righteous man. You've got all of that, and the reward, of course, is eternal and abundant life and relationship with Him. The one who receives Jesus' disciples who are declaring that gospel and seeking to live it out receive the reward of receiving someone who is like that. They hear the gospel. They are blessed. And it didn't have to be a grand thing either. Jesus goes on. He says receiving sort of stretches down to the smallest of actions. Jesus says this. He says, "Whoever gives one of these little ones even a cup of cold water because he is a disciple." You make it easy for me. Even if you give one of my disciples a cup of cold water, He will by no means lose His reward. Here Jesus calls the disciples little ones, reminding us of who we are on the team, right, and also how much we matter because there is a reward for those who will bless even the smallest of the disciples. I'm reminded of Paul writing like this when he says it like this. He says, "For consider your calling, brothers. You consider, think about your calling. Not many of you were wise according to worldly standards. Not many were powerful. Not many were of noble birth. But God chose what is foolish in the world to shame the wise. God chose what is weak in the world to shame the strong. God chose what is low and despised in the world, even things that are not, to bring to nothing things that are so that no being might boast in the presence of God." My brother got the trophy. He never boasted about that team. The one who receives the Christian, the little one, saved by grace, won't lose his reward by giving in small ways. He gains his reward. In some ways, I think that's just kind of a call to all of us. There is nothing quite so small and seemingly insignificant as giving a cup of cold water to somebody. But there are always these kinds of things that we can be doing for one another. We must be those who are ready to receive other believers, to warmly welcome Christians, to show hospitality, to give our time, energy, money, bless them, even in small, seemingly insignificant ways. I would want you to be encouraged that everything that you do is going to be a blessing to you. I would want you to be encouraged that everything that you do, everything that you do for the glory of God and the glory of Christ, He's saying that matters. You won't lose your reward. The number of times we wander around thinking, are we being productive enough? Are we being good enough? If we would just focus. Everything that you think is insignificant, oh, it's not doing much. Scripture says if it's a cup of cold water for one of my disciples, you will by no means lose your reward. Jesus didn't place us with Him on the team so that we would boast about how awesome we are. Or so that we would think that now that He's put us on the team, we better take over. We got a lot of things to do if we're going to shake up the earth, if we're going to impact the world. He's already impacted it. He's already shaken it up. That's what Jesus does. Jesus finishes His instruction to the disciples and then He sends them out and He, of course, goes to with them. They go out knowing that they're on the team. But we know now even more than they did at this point in time when they went out, don't we? Because we know the prize. We know that Jesus will one day take up His own cross and die for our sins and then rise again. We know that in doing that He secures eternal life, eternal life for all those who believe in His name. And by God's grace, as those who have repented of our sin and cried out to Christ for forgiveness, who no longer strive to find our lives here but have given over our life that Christ might dwell in us and give us real life, we know that we are on the team and that we will stand and that we will receive the prize. Together. Until that day, may we live expecting that to follow Jesus is to bring a sword. It's to bring conflict. At the same time, may we know that our union with Christ means that we also bring blessing. We bring good news wherever we go. And why? Because Jesus is with us wherever we go. Let's pray. Father in Heaven, we are so grateful for the salvation that we have in Christ and the good news You've given us both to live out and to share with others. May we do this with right expectations. Knowing that the gospel creates divisions and yet may we do this with joy, knowing that You are with us wherever we go because of our union with Your Son and knowing that we are Your ambassadors in this world, sharing good news for all who will receive it. Holy Spirit, comfort and encourage us with Jesus' words. Help us to trust God in all things. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray. Amen.