# INTRO

I don't think it's bird, I don't think it's a bug. I think it's exactly what a UFO stands for, unidentified flying object.

We did discover and explore many, many things in ways that frankly at the beginning was almost like a miracle. And then as we go forward, it looks like something new we never would have guessed.

Hey! Hey! Unexplained sightings of flying objects in the sky for decades. The space agency launching a new team to investigate who or what may be behind the unexplained sightings.

Just last month, this video shot on an iPhone during an air show in Miami appears to show something is shooting up out of the water with people swimming nearby.

Of unidentified aerial phenomena to a P or what we all call unidentified flying objects.

And I saw it, and I was like, what in the, like no way.

Check on 6-1-10. Roger, Mark. Let's go. Break it down here. I'm on it now.

# PODCAST

Listening to an alien revelation, the history of UFO disclosure, this is episode four, the summer of 1947, saucer fever and the cover up.

Oh my gosh. Wow, that's so funny. It's fun.

Headline edition, July 8th, 1947.

The Army Air Forces has announced that a flying disk has been found and is now in the possession of the army. Army officers say the missile found sometime last week has been infected at Roswell, New Mexico and sent to Wright Field, Ohio for further inspection.

The date was June 24th, 1947. The location was the Cascade Mountain Range in Washington state. Near Mount Rainier. Experienced pilot and businessman, Kenneth Arnold was flying from Boise, Idaho while participating in the search for a downed C-47 transport aircraft. When while searching out the landscape, he noticed a brilliant flash that got his attention. Upon getting reoriented and focusing his eyesight in the direction of the flash, Mr. Arnold noticed nine shiny disks flying in a reverse V formation. In clocking their speed against the background landscape, Arnold calculated that the objects were flying at approximately 1,700 miles an hour. Just over the top speed of a modern F-15 fighter jet. No aircraft at the time was capable of even approaching those speeds.

As he observed the objects, Arnold noticed that their motion seemed somewhat inconsistent. Sort of like they were saucers being skipped over a pond. Upon landing in Oregon and upon reporting his sighting, the story made it into the local press where the modern myth of the flying saucer would be born.

The FBI would later interview Arnold and find him to be quote, very credible and that he simply was a man who was reporting what he saw in their eyes.

Now initially, Arnold would publicly state his belief that he had witnessed some sort of secret government test of guided missiles. However, in the coming weeks and months, it would become clear to Arnold and to the rest of the nation that perhaps something much more significant was going on. That perhaps something otherworldly was occurring.

You see, almost immediately after Arnold's sighting, reports would flood in from Kansas City, Oklahoma City, and Colorado of more of these flying saucers or flying discs as they were also called. Sightings would also occur in the summer of 1947 in Canada, in Australia, and in New Zealand. Some of these sightings would include military pilots as well as commercial pilots.

In his book, UFOs in the National Security State, Chronology of a Cover-Up, 1941-1973, researcher Richard Dolan observes the following. He says, activity increased yet more on Friday, July 4th. One sighting that occurred near Boise, Idaho, received a great deal of attention since the objects were witnessed by Captain Edward J. Smith and his co-pilot Ralph Stevens of United Airlines. Smith was a highly regarded pilot with much experience in the air. While en route to Portland, Smith and Stevens saw nine disc-like objects. Smith's stature prompted an FBI investigation into the sightings, which credited him as reliable.

In Portland, many people, including police officers, saw a large number of UFOs in the middle of the afternoon in formation and alone. In Redmond, Oregon, a car full of people saw four disc-shaped UFOs streak past Mount Jefferson. In Seattle, a Coast Guard yeoman took the first publicly known photograph of a UFO, a circular object, moving against the wind. The photo showed a round dot of light.

As the summer progressed, the reports in the media and even comments from government officials would lead to what can only be described as saucer fever. And saucer fever wouldn't end in the summer of 1947. The fever over flying saucers would continue into the years ahead as more and more credible witnesses would come forward with similar reports of metallic objects, which seemed to defy the laws of physics with their speed, maneuverability, and with their ability to operate silently.

The pattern would continue to spike each year in the summer months with new objects such as green fireballs being observed, along with new capabilities. One sighting, which was reported by Air Force Major Edwin A. Jerome in the summer of 1948, led to an investigation that discovered that the objects in question moved at approximately 9,000 miles per hour. Faster than any known aircraft, even in our day.

Later in the summer of 1952, the U.S. Capitol and the White House would be buzzed by these objects, an event that would be witnessed by airline pilots, by radar operators, and by people on the ground. Again, objects were observed making breakneck turns and traveling in excess of 7,000 miles per hour. Because of the high-profile nature of the Capitol, and because of the widespread nature of these particular sightings, on July 29, 1952, Major General John Samfort, Director of U.S. Air Force Intelligence, held a press conference in Washington, D.C., pertaining to the sightings.

While he would claim in the press conference that temperature inversions were to blame for the sightings and for the bizarre radar returns, he did acknowledge that there was something to this phenomenon that had been reported for the last five years.

Since 1947, we have received and analyzed between one in 2,000 reports that have come to us from all kinds of sources. Of this great mass of reports, we have been able adequately to explain the great bulk of them, explain them to our own satisfaction. We've been able to explain them as hoaxes, as erroneously identified friendly aircraft, as meteorological or electronic phenomena, or as light aberrations. However, there have been a certain percentage of this volume of reports that have been made by credible observers of relatively incredible things. It is this group of observations that we now are attempting to resolve.

And just as it continues to in our day, government acknowledgment of the phenomenon would provoke all sorts of questions and paranoid speculations from the media and from the general public. Were these top-secret Soviet aircraft preparing to attack? Did some of the Nazis escape with their most advanced devices? And are they watching us and gathering intelligence and preparing to attack and re-engage World War II? Is this our own government's technology, which would certainly be a comforting thought as the Cold War was beginning to ramp up the idea that our government had top-secret devices capable of such feats? Or, as many began to think, is this technology from another planet whose inhabitants are either here to enlighten us or to eliminate us?

These questions alone would provoke the U.S. government to immediately begin a campaign to control the narrative around these flying disks and to calm the nerves of the general public. As General Samford alluded to in the July 29, 1952 press conference, the government would then officially engage in a campaign to investigate and try to explain the flying disks through several programs in the coming years and decades, first through Project Sign, then through Project Grudge, and then through Project Blue Book.

But, dear listener, we can't truly talk about the summer of 1947 and the saucer fever that would ensue without talking about perhaps the most significant event that summer, which would occur in Roswell, New Mexico.

Now, there are conflicting accounts about exactly when it occurred, but sometime in June or early July, something strange fell from the sky above Roswell, New Mexico. On Saturday, July 5, 1947, a man named Mac Brazil found crash debris on the Foster Ranch, where he worked as the ranch foreman. The material that he allegedly found included eye beams with strange writing on it, similar to hieroglyphics, metal foil that was indestructible and that would return to its shape after being folded or crinkled up, along with other materials that sounded like fiber optic cables.

On Sunday, July 6, the Brazil would load up some of this debris and bring it to the sheriff's office in Roswell, New Mexico, and the sheriff would then report the debris to Roswell Army Air Force Base. Colonel William Blanchard would then order Major Jesse Marcel to investigate the crash debris.

Now, in testimony given years later, Major Marcel would recount how the debris field was almost a mile long when he arrived at the site and that it was littered with this debris that Mac Brazil brought to the sheriff's office. He described it as if something had maybe hit the ground and skipped along, leaving the littered gouge behind. Marcel was not only not able to positively identify it as anything belonging to the U.S. Army Air Force, but he also could not identify it as anything belonging to any known terrestrial power, nor did it appear to be debris from any known rocket or missile that were being tested at the nearby Los Alamos test site. Especially the strange hieroglyphic type writing that was found on it led him to conclude that this was something otherworldly.

This would lead to the famous press statement given to the Roswell Daily Record on July 8, 1947. Quote, the intelligence office of the 509th Bombardment Group at Roswell Army Airfield announced at noon today that the field has come into possession of a flying saucer. End quote.

In the context of the saucer fever that was gripping the nation in that summer, the news headlines about Roswell would go nationwide as it not only appeared as if some sort of invasion by these flying disks was occurring, but that perhaps one of these strange objects had either crashed or had been shot down by the U.S. military.

However, almost as soon as the headlines went out, they were then immediately reeled back in. At a press conference held only three hours after the news headline went out, General Ramey ordered Major Marcel into his office for a press conference with the Associated Press where ordinary weather balloon debris was scattered on the ground and where Major Marcel would later go on the record to say that he was pressured into saying that the debris on the ground of General Ramey's office was the same debris that his men discovered at the Foster Ranch.

And since that press release, the Air Force has continued to maintain that only a weather balloon was discovered in Roswell, New Mexico in July of 1947, though they later added in 1997 at a press conference that they were willing to disclose that it was a top-secret weather balloon under Project Mogul that they wanted to keep secret as it was spying on the Soviets and the development of their nuclear weapons technology. And so there was a cover-up, but it was only for a top-secret weather balloon.

However, there is good reason to doubt the Air Force's story. First, Major Marcel would go on the record decades later, as I said, saying that the debris found was not the same debris that was scattered in General Ramey's office for the Associated Press and that it was indeed an otherworldly material that he discovered. So also, Jesse Marcel Jr., Major Marcel's son, who would also go on to live an honorable life of service to our nation in the military, he maintained that he had handled the debris as a young man and he confirmed that it was not of this world and that his father and that his colleagues in the military knew this at the time.

In the following decades, as well, dozens of witnesses to the events would corroborate the crash and the cover-up from Louis Rickett to General Arthur Exon to William Brazile, the son of Mack Brazile, the rancher who discovered the debris, and Glenn Dennis, the mortician in Roswell, New Mexico, along with many others who came forward. They would testify to the existence of this strange debris, the out-of-proportion military presence for a downed weather balloon, the huge gouge in the ground that was not consistent with a weather balloon, and the military putting threats against witnesses like Mack Brazile, who was imprisoned for a time, simply for reporting what he had discovered, along with reports of the existence of bodies amongst the wreckage.

Glenn Dennis, the mortician, would testify that he was asked for small coffins for young children and that a nurse at the base saw the deceased corpses of non-humans on the base who were the size of small children.

But the mere fact that the wreckage was flown to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, under secure military transport, that was ordered to fly below radar, that is perhaps the most striking feature of the Roswell incident. You see, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base was also where the Army Air Force's Research and Development and Foreign Technologies Division would be located. And just as a side note in connecting this to modern times, one of Tom DeLonge's advisors who was exposed during the 2016 WikiLeaks dump was none other than General Neil McCasland, the head of the Air Force's Research and Development Division at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.

But it would be rather odd, if you think about it, for a weather balloon, or even a top-secret weather balloon, to be flown to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base under such high security simply for analysis. In fact, other top-secret mogul weather balloons did crash. And the military in those cases did not respond in the same way that it did at Roswell. In fact, civilians were allowed to run off with pieces of other top-secret mogul weather balloon debris when they crashed. And no military details were sent to collect the stolen debris from the perpetrators.

So also General Nathan Twining, commander of the Air Material Command, would be diverted to New Mexico from an appointment he had with the Boeing Corporation. In a letter written later to a Boeing executive, he explained his absence by saying, quote, a very important and sudden matter developed here, speaking of New Mexico.

But regardless of whatever truly did happen in Roswell, New Mexico, the initial denial and cover story was successful in burying the event until the witnesses would come forward later in the 1970s and 80s when researchers like Bill Moore and Stanton Friedman began looking into the event. In fact, both Moore and Friedman would be directed in their rediscovery of the event and the witnesses by members of the intelligence community, some of whom continue to be involved with the present push for UFO disclosure.

So in the 1970s and 80s, the Roswell story would resurface and it would be reborn and it would be used to initiate the acclimatization process, which we will be examining in future episodes.

But what actually then happened in Roswell? Well, believe it or not, I have no firm opinion as to what exactly happened in Roswell, New Mexico in July of 1947, other than that it was most likely not a weather balloon or even a top secret weather balloon that crashed. However, everything from an alien spacecraft to a Russian attempt to overwhelm America's air defenses with a fake alien invasion that supposedly included advanced technology and cosmetically altered children, all of the above has been proposed as to what really went down in Roswell, New Mexico.

In fact, LA Times reporter Annie Jacobson in her book on Area 51, she recounts how one of her contacts, who used to be a high level general out at Area 51, told her that the attempted Russian hoaxed alien invasion was precisely what happened in the summer of 1947, specifically at Roswell, but that the government continues to cover it up because our own government was engaging in similar programs of seeking to possibly hoax a alien invasion in Russia using advanced technology and cosmetically altered children. Not exactly good for public relations. So there is a mutually assured desire there to cover up one another's programs.

Tom DeLonge in his books and in his interviews, he has claimed that his advisors and that his research has led him to the conclusion that the object that crashed at Roswell was indeed a German craft operated by an enclave of escaped Nazis who have continued to operate in the shadows as a sort of breakaway civilization. And that so as not to create panic amongst the public, the government has continued to cover up this reality.

And yet other groups like the so-called Collins elite, an alleged group of Christians within the government who are involved with studying the subject, a group that many within the disclosure movement and within the media have said does indeed exist, they supposedly claim that Roswell was an object from another dimension whose physical nature was produced by alchemical means, which is a medieval occult practice that was pursued by men like John Dee.

Whatever the truth is, it is clear that something significant occurred in the deserts of New Mexico in 1947, at the very least, at least something significant in the public imagination, and that Roswell thus continues to function as a founding narrative of the modern belief in UFOs and UFO disclosure. Roswell is like the Torah of the book of disclosure.

And certainly the government cover up has fueled much of this contradictory speculation about what really happened, which is why disclosure may actually be helpful in reining in some of the more wild speculations and conspiracy theories that surround this subject.

In fact, that appears to be the desire of Congress, the current National Defense Authorization Act for 2023, which is due to pass in the coming weeks as I record this episode. That bill is apparently written to uncover the truth of these matters and possibly to uncover the truth of Roswell. A rather large percentage of the bill deals with UFOs or UAPs, as they are called. And Congress specifically asks that the Department of Defense go back to records from 1947, and they request the Department of Defense to dig up all that they can related to UFOs and to the alleged recovery of physical evidence of UFOs, and to report back to Congress with their findings.

And so perhaps in the coming months and years, we may get clarity on these matters that will put some of this speculation to rest.

But clarity on the nature of the phenomenon and of the events that occurred in 1947, such as the Roswell crash and everything that would follow from it, this would all be obscured by the U.S. government in the 1950s and going into the 1960s.

You see, while the government would acknowledge the phenomenon, they would also begin to obfuscate and cover up the story of UFOs going into the second half of the 20th century. You see, what General Sanford would do at the press conference in July of 1952, by acknowledging the phenomenon while also trying to explain it away, would become the official policy of the U.S. government.

In fact, the CIA and the intelligence community would convene a panel known as the Robertson Panel that would openly state that their goal was to explain away and to debunk UFO reports in the mainstream media.

Now, the official reason given by the panel for this policy was to avoid overwhelming the U.S. air defense system with reports of UFOs. The idea was that if the government encouraged any sort of paranoia about UFOs, then this could be used by the Russians to overwhelm our then primitive air defense reporting systems ahead of potential attack or invasion. In other words, UFOs could be used as a psyop by foreign governments against the American public and against the American military.

And while this reasoning certainly was valid, and while it can even provoke our sympathy given the Cold War and all that was going on, it set the precedent that it was acceptable for the government to mislead the American public about this subject. And the deliberate misleading of the American public about this subject would continue to increase in the years and in the decades ahead.

Project Blue Book, which was the Air Force's longest running UFO program, would conclude with the Condon Report, which would deny that there was anything of significance to the subject of UFOs, and it thus recommended that the study be disbanded. This determination was made despite the fact that according to their own records, 20 percent of the reports remained unexplained, and despite the fact that an opposing committee complained and blew the whistle that the head of the committee, Edward Condon, had already made up his mind before looking at the data and had already decided to debunk and dismiss the subject in entirety.

So also the former chief scientific advisor for Project Blue Book, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, the man who famously told the media that a UFO flap in Michigan was simply due to swamp gas. He later came out and said that he was pressured by the Air Force all that time to explain cases that were unexplainable, no matter how silly his explanations would have to be, hence the famous swamp gas explanation. His close friend and associate, Dr. Jacques Ville, a man we have mentioned before and will continue to mention, he later discovered that the most significant and data-rich UFO reports were the whole time being filtered to another classified study, apart from Project Blue Book. So Project Blue Book seemed to be just a public relations debunking campaign.

Indeed, there is mountains of evidence to demonstrate that not only has the government known that UFOs are real all along, a fact that the government has basically admitted to now, but that they had a determined policy to mislead and to lie to the American public about the subject.

But why? Why spend so much determined effort to mislead the public about a subject that perhaps the government doesn't even have any clear answers to? Well, there are many national security reasons as to why the government would want to mislead the public and to thus mislead foreign governments about unknown objects in their skies. Again, there is a desire to not create panic and to potentially overwhelm our air defense systems. There is the counterintelligence value of making it seem like the US government is maybe covering up its own advanced super secret technologies that are light years more advanced than their adversaries. And there is also the idea that if there is something tangible to this subject that can be studied and applied scientifically and technologically, then the government doesn't want to lay down their cards about what they do and don't know before foreign adversaries who may be trying to figure it out and develop their own technologies based upon their findings.

But perhaps the most intriguing explanation for the cover-up has been offered by political scientist Alexander Wendt. Wendt's thesis is that the UFO challenges our humanistic understanding of sovereignty and therefore governments built upon that humanistic understanding must cover it up because acknowledging the existence of potentially superior intelligent beings overthrows the post-enlightenment concept that man is at the top of the food chain, that man is the measure of all things and that therefore the most powerful human governments, like our own government, are not the measure of all things. Wendt, who is actually referenced in Tom DeLonge's Secret Machines non-fiction series, delivered his thesis during a TED Talk delivered in 2020.

Taboos are about fear, cultural fears usually. And I think my suggestion here is that perhaps the reason this taboo is so powerful is that we are afraid subconsciously of what we might find out if we actually opened up the door of science and tried to understand what these phenomena are.

In an op-ed in the Washington Post entitled, UFOs Exist, and we all need to adjust to that fact, Wendt's article, Sovereignty in the UFO, was also cited by the author of that op-ed, Daniel Drezner. Drezner writes, in that paper, eventually published in the journal Political Theory, Wendt and Duval argued that state sovereignty as we understand it is anthropocentric, or constituted and organized by reference to human beings alone. They argued that the real reason UFOs have been dismissed is because of the existential challenge that they pose for a worldview in which human beings are the most technologically advanced life forms. UFOs have never been systematically investigated by science or the state because it is assumed to be known that none are extraterrestrial. Yet, in fact, this is not known, which makes the UFO taboo puzzling given the ET possibility. The puzzle is explained by the functional imperatives of anthropocentric sovereignty, which cannot decide a UFO exception to the anthropocentricism while preserving the ability to make such a decision. The UFO can be, quote, known only by not asking what it is, end quote.

And this fits in with what the scriptures say about fallen men. You see, the Bible makes it clear that when Adam and Eve sinned, that the motive behind that first sin was a desire for autonomy. In other words, man sought to set himself up to be the measure of all things, to be as gods, knowing good and evil. The fallen consciousness of man is an anthropocentric consciousness. And as Paul says in Romans 1, man is willing to suppress the truth in order to pursue this desire for autonomy.

Now, of course, first and foremost, mankind denies and suppresses the truth about God, even though, as Paul says, that truth is plain to him by what has been made. However, by extension, mankind will also deny any reality that may point back to God or to the reality of spiritual things or to any reality that might challenge the idea that man himself is the measure of all things, that the world is an anthropocentric place.

For example, men will invent ideas about how everything randomly evolved by chance in order to silence the voice of the created order that it is a product of an intelligent creator. And so likewise, while mankind in ages past worshipped and served angels and demons, or so-called gods as they were called in the pagan religions, yet in the modern world man has become philosophically committed to self-dependence while denying all those so-called fairy tales of our past which spoke of angels, demons, gods, and spirits.

In fact, a characteristic of the modern world is that modern governments are not formed or constituted in reference to any higher beings. Throughout Christian history, virtually all governments in the West were founded upon a covenant or upon a religious confession that was made to the Christian religion and to the authority of Christ. Before that, and in other parts of the world where the gospel hadn't been penetrated, religions were formed around the gods or around the reality of spiritual forces. But the modern world is characterized by the fact that our governments are formed in reference to man for man.

And so when a phenomenon appears in our skies that functions like those dusty old fairy tales that we think we've moved beyond, modern man's knee-jerk reaction is to deny, ridicule, and to suppress. And especially if the UFO phenomenon appears to be largely spiritual in nature, as I argue in this podcast, then modern man will certainly cover it up and seek to suppress it.

As C.S. Lewis writes in his introduction to the Screwtape Letters, the devil would have us either become materialists or magicians. And as we considered two episodes prior, after the enchantment of the Renaissance with men and magicians like John Dee, the Western world became committed to philosophical materialism. And so when the saucer fever hit the Western world in 1947, the institutions of the West, which were committed to materialism, immediately sought to control and suppress the subject of UFOs.

Indeed, we went from John Dee's magic to the materialism of the Enlightenment. And through the work of men like Jack Parsons, magic was reasserting itself as a force in Western culture. As UFO researcher Grant Cameron implies in the title of his book, Documenting the History of Modern UFO Disclosure, Managing Magic, the intelligence community has sought to do just that. They have sought to manage magic by controlling the UFO narrative.

And yet as one affiliate of the intelligence community told me in a phone call back in 2018, Grant is right. We are managing magic. But you see, magic is not very easily managed.

And so we will examine the government's attempt to manage this story by debunking and by ridicule, while also simultaneously leaking out both true and false stories to the media in a slow rolling acclimatization process. And we will examine all of that in our next episode, which will be entitled Top Secret Magic.

Thank you for watching. Please subscribe, like and comment.