# INTRO

I don't think it's bird, I don't think it's bug. I think it's exactly what a UFO stands for, unidentified flying object.

We did discover and explore many, many things in ways that frankly at the beginning look almost like a miracle. And then as we go forward, it looks like something new we never would have guessed.

Hey, hey! Unexplained sightings of flying objects in the sky for decades. The space agency launching a new team to investigate who or what may be behind the unexplained sightings.

Just last month, this video shot on an iPhone during an air show in Miami appears to show something shooting up out of the water with people swimming nearby.

Of unidentified aerial phenomena, UAP, or what we all call unidentified flying objects.

When I saw it, I was like, what in the, like no way!

# INTRO

This video was made possible with support from the UAP Foundation, and by the members of the UAP Foundation. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you.

We've been listening to an alien revelation, the history of UFO disclosure. This is episode seven, Stranger Things.

Look at this! Oh my gosh! Wow! Look at this! It's a prize!

So far in this series, as we have investigated the history of the UFO phenomenon, as well as the history of both the UFO coverup and the push for UFO disclosure, we have seen several themes coalescing and coming together around this subject. We have seen that UFOs are connected to the occult, to various interpretations of religious phenomenon. And we have seen that UFOs seem to especially be interested in engaging human beings at the level of consciousness.

And while there is nothing remarkable about these observations to those who are a part of the UFO community, I'm sure that with many of you who have been listening, this has come as somewhat of a shock. I'm sure it sounds more like an episode from Stranger Things than anything else. However, as we interview our guest in this episode, we are going to find that the Netflix series, Stranger Things, is actually based more upon fact than you might realize.

You see, in the 1970s, due to intelligence reports coming out of the Soviet Union, which indicated that the Russians were working on a psychic spy program, the United States government began their own research into psychic phenomenon at some of the most classified levels. And like the Russians, they explored everything from remote viewing to psychokinesis, or the practice of moving objects with the mind, as well as what was called negative healing, or the practice of actively trying to cause biological damage to living organisms from a distance through psychic means. These programs went under various names, such as Project Grill Flame and Project Stargate, interestingly enough. And they were officially ended in the 1990s due to a lack of consistent results, though there was an admission by the intelligence community that the program did produce some results, though many claim that it worked a lot better than the government was willing to admit.

Now, if you are hearing this and going, oh, come on, forget Stranger Things, this is that silly George Clooney movie, The Men Who Stare at Goats, well, you'd be right, actually. But you see, many people fail to realize that The Men Who Stare at Goats is based upon a book that is based in part on Project Stargate. In fact, the main character that George Clooney plays in The Men Who Stare at Goats, Lynn Cassidy, is a composite character based partly upon a man named Colonel John Alexander, a man who was not only involved with the remote viewing programs, but a man who has also been involved in the push for UFO disclosure since the 1980s.

You see, even within the government, there has always been a connection between the study of UFOs and the study of the paranormal and the study of the nature of human consciousness. Just think about what Wilbert Smith said in his memo to the Canadian government about UFOs being studied in the US government in conjunction with the study of mental phenomena.

And one of the leaders of the government's early research into psychic phenomenon and the paranormal was, you guessed it, Jacques Vallée. You see, Jacques Vallée would be involved with what was called the Stanford Research Institute, or SRI for short, an institute at Stanford University, partly run by the Central Intelligence Agency. And while Jacques was working for SRI in the 1970s, he would use his skills as a computer scientist and as an analyst, along with his insights into UFOs and human consciousness to help develop research into psychic abilities at the institute. And you can learn about SRI and the history of the government's research into psychic powers in Annie Jacobson's book, The Phenomenon, or you can check out her interviews on the Joe Rogan podcast. But even she spends several pages in her book connecting the government study of psychic abilities to the government study of the UFO phenomenon. So there's a connection there. In fact, she even writes about men like Captain David Morehouse, who helped to bring down the government's research in this area because he believed that the protocols that he was trained in for remote viewing were making him crazy and that he was becoming possessed by demons.

And so while it may sound like stranger things, the government has indeed been involved with seeking to weaponize the occult. And as we are going to see today in our interview, the government has sought to use occultic means to contact entities for assistance in developing psychotronic weapons.

And so that brings us to our guest for this episode, Dr. Ray Boucher. Now to give you some background on Dr. Boucher, he is a conservative Lutheran minister in the Lutheran Church, Missouri Synod, who is also a long time researcher of the UFO phenomenon and the paranormal. And as we will hear him recounted in the 1990s, he was contacted by members of the Defense Intelligence Agency who were involved with projects that were adjacent to Project Stargate, which were actively seeking to contact what they called non-human intelligences in order to gain a strategic advantage over America's enemies. And so Dr. Boucher is a firsthand witness, not only to how ufology turned into a religion in the 1970s and in the 1980s, but also he is a witness to the fact that the government has recognized the spiritual and the occultic nature of the UFO phenomenon for a very long time. And so without any further ado, let's get to the interview.

All right, well, Ray, why don't you begin by just telling us a little bit about your background and how it is that you got involved with the subject of UFOs and the paranormal.

I am from a small town in Southeast Nebraska. I grew up the oldest of four children. My dad was killed in an accident when I was 12. And I had been raised in a Disciples of Christ church. And nothing ever seemed to really make sense to me. I had a lot of, as I look back on it, a lot of pretty insightful questions to ask the pastor and never got any satisfactory answers. He was much more liberal in terms of even, this would be in the 60s, even in terms of liberal for the 60s, he was kind of on a cutting edge of it. So I didn't get a lot of satisfaction in terms of what Christianity was about. And after my dad was killed, I took about a six year period where I explored everything from Buddhism to Hinduism to Wicca to Satanism to the occult in general, looking for truth. Nothing ever satisfied me in terms of this is truth. I was fascinated for a while with Wicca as an ancient tradition and thought, well, you know, if it's that ancient, this is really interesting. And then the deeper you dig into it, you find out that really it's Genesis as it's known now came out of folklore and folk medicine, but it really took on this form by Gerald Gardner, a British man who kind of concocted it all in the 30s, 40s and 50s. So I thought, well, I don't want something that somebody dreamed up 40 years ago. What's the point in that?

My senior year of high school, my high school choir director was a very committed Christian and we'd had a lot of argumentative discussions about my search and about Christianity. And finally, in April of 1973, it was revealed to me, God showed me that what he had actually done was to punish himself for the sins of humanity and take that burden on himself. And he wanted us to come to him and he would forgive us. I mean, it was really a see the light kind of moment. And so I came to Christ then. One of the first things I did was to arrange and promote a concert by a Christian band in Nebraska City. That was the first outreach thing I had ever done. It was great and I have been more or less at it ever since.

I had gotten interested in 1965 in the whole question of UFOs and flying saucers when our whole family saw, the best I can guess, a hundred foot in diameter or so brilliantly lit saucer that passed over our house from south to north about tree top level. And it was seen not only by my family, but also by our neighbors to the north of us and made some of the papers in the Omaha area. So it had been seen by a number of people, but it was absolutely unexplainable, completely silent and definitely a solid craft, not just a light in the sky, but definitely what you would call the prototypical flying saucer. So that really spurred my interest in that topic. And by the time I was 12, by the time my dad was killed, I had developed an intense interest in it and was in correspondence with the folks at NYCAP, the National Investigations Committee for Aerial Phenomena and APRO, the Aerial Phenomena Research Organization, and was actively tracking down cases that would appear in the paper, that my folks would hear about, that neighbors would hear about. I became the kid that's interested in all that weird stuff.

The first real in-depth interview I did was with a policeman in Ashland, Nebraska, Herb Shermer, who had a very famous abduction event that took place in December of 67. And I found out about it in early 1968. And being the precocious kid I was, I called Herb Shermer and he was gracious enough to speak to me on the telephone. And we had a long conversation and he was just a very gracious man taking the time to talk to a kid. I mean, he'd been hounded by the press from across the country. So to take the time to talk to me, it impressed me. It was a great opportunity to really stick my toe into this whole field with an early, well-known abduction story. Plus, get to see Herb Shermer's decline. Shortly after this, he was made the chief of police of Ashland, Nebraska, youngest police chief in the nation at the time. And his life just fell apart from this. He served as the chief of police for about six months and he resigned because this event prayed so heavily on his mind, he felt he wasn't doing justice to the job and so he chose to resign. And he sort of sunk into obscurity and I believe he's passed away now. A great guy and his story of a bizarre encounter with this phenomenon and then a decline in his personal life and wellbeing is so typical of many cases that have happened. This is not a healthy phenomenon to get involved with. There are some grave dangers to it.

I continued, wasn't very active during my college years because I was busy getting a degree, but resumed my interest and then became, before too long, the state director for MUFON for the state of Nebraska, was asked by the University of Nebraska to organize two international conferences on unexplained phenomena. And in the course of putting on those conferences, it became very apparent to me that the occult and the New Age mode of thinking was creeping strongly into what should have been a field of pure research in the same terms as you would consider anthropological research, a pure research area. You're not dealing with necessarily empirical facts, but you're dealing with folk tales and stories and traditions and things like that. But instead it was morphing into a religion. And I realized there's no one out there, the few things that I had seen that had been published on the subject of UFOs from a Christian position displayed such ignorance of the history of the phenomena and what was actually going on that anyone who was interested, who wasn't a believer, would just find them laughable. And so I thought, no one is addressing this from a Christian perspective. So eventually in 1988, I decided, you know, I need to present a perspective of this that is from a Christian worldview. In order to do that and do it well, I need more training. I had been accepted into Princeton Theological Seminary and was very enamored of that idea because it was so prestigious. The day that we were gonna put our house on the market, my wife said, I don't think this is a good idea. God put a warning in her spirit and I was profoundly disappointed because if I don't go to Princeton, I lose out on all that prestige. So I got over it and enrolled in a Masters of Sacred Theology at St. Mark's School of Divinity. And as I look back on it now, if I had gone to Princeton, my time there would have been spent either constantly arguing with the theologically liberal faculty or succumbing to the lure of the historical critical method which had been perverted by liberal theologians. And so I got absolutely the best education that I could possibly get through St. Mark's and shortly after I graduated in 1991, they closed. And so I have no prestige. I got a degree from a school that doesn't exist any longer, but I got the best education I think I could have gotten anywhere in the country. So it was an excellent experience.

I was ordained first as a Baptist pastor. I was then asked by the Reformed Episcopal Church. In 1993, we started talking and they asked in 1994 if I'd be interested in transferring my credentials and planting a church here. I said, I'm a theologian, not a pastor. They said, we'll think about it, pray about it. So I got about a dozen folks, friends of ours at our Baptist church that we were attending, asked them to start praying about it. And God opened some doors in some pretty interesting ways. And in 1994, I transferred my ministerial credentials and became a priest in the Reformed Episcopal Church and planted a church here. That was a real eye-opener to me because I found that I love being a pastor. It's much more fulfilling than just being a theologian because you actually get on a weekly or daily basis get to touch people's lives. And that is an enormous blessing in and of itself. I did that for about 10 years. I had some health issues, I had a heart attack and I lost a lung to lung cancer. And I was working full-time as a graphic artist as well. If no one's aware of this, there is no such thing as a part-time pastor. You may have that title, but you're serving as a pastor full-time, even while you're on your normal job. So I had to make a choice. The church just wasn't quite big enough to support a pastor yet. To make a very long story, not quite as long, I then transferred my credentials to the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod and spent 12 years serving full-time, the second largest church in Nebraska and one of the largest LCMS churches in the country as their pastor for adult education, and was still able to do a little bit of outreach to the UFO community. It was a great opportunity, it was a blessing to be able to work with 3,500 people for 12 years. And that's how I got involved in not only UFOs, the supernatural, but into the ministry as well. So that's the story.

And you spoke of the man that you interviewed who was the abduction case. And you made that observation that the phenomenon brings nothing good into the lives of those who encounter it. In 1991, you were contacted by two men from the DOD and they essentially came to you with that same observation in light of some programs that they were involved with seeking to interact with the phenomenon. Can you describe how that conversation began? And can you give us an overview of what it is that they communicated to you and what they were seeking to get from you in that conversation?

In 1991, I was serving as the art director and production manager for a printing company here in Lincoln. And the week before Thanksgiving in November, I received a call from a man who, and don't ask me how they tracked me down, how they knew where I was, because I don't know, but a man who said he and his friend were in the area for a couple of weeks and would like to talk with me. And they said that they were scientific researchers with the Department of Defense, and they had some questions and concerns they wanted to discuss with me. And because of my background in the UFO field and my background in theology, they thought that I could be of assistance to them. So we arranged to meet the next Monday at the Cornhusker Hotel here in Lincoln. We had lunch, and then we retired to a quiet corner of the hotel and sat there for about three hours probably.

As they told me their story, what it amounts to, they were involved in leading a program that the Department of Defense had established to interact with what they termed non-human intelligences. And they believed that these were the intelligences behind the UFO phenomenon, but also behind a lot of other occultic or supernatural phenomenon. It was the same source. And what their goal was was to discover what enabled these non-human entities to behave in supernatural ways and to mechanize that and weaponize it to be used for a defensive or offensive weapon against America's enemies. They were concerned because the direction a lot of this had taken had moved from strictly scientific to some things that seemed very much bordering on the Jack Parsons situation, Aleister Crowley, the ritual magic aspect of it, and even human sacrifices in the goal of trying to harness these forces and weaponize them.

The one thing they had said was that every time they discovered something and seemed to be on the verge of understanding the phenomenon, it turned against them. And they said, there is nothing good about this. It is actually evil. They did not know how to respond to it because they were both believers. They didn't know for certain what they were getting into, what they were involved with, and they wanted my opinion on what was going on.

Now, the interesting thing about this, there are some theological issues that I have with what they told me. They intimated that Jack Parsons and the Babylon working, this ritual magic working that he did in the mid 1940s, is what opened a gateway to allow these entities to come through, and that was the origin of the modern flying saucer phenomenon. What they're describing is something that is definitely demonic, but to say that a demon needed to wait for Jack Parsons to hold his jaw just right and pronounce the words just right to allow them passage into this world, misses the whole theological point of what demons are and the fact that Satan is the prince of this world. He's the prince of the power of the air. Christ has conquered him, but he's still allowed to work his mischief in this world. So to say that he had to wait for this to happen, that's just not true. Could there be a link? Absolutely. Did Parsons do some things that were not good, to put it mildly? Yes, absolutely. Parsons was doing this with L. Ron Hubbard, and out of this whole thing then develops the cult of Scientology, which is another can of worms, but they are linked, and if there's anything much more demonic than the roots of Scientology, I have yet to see it, but that was the general thrust of what they had to say and what they were concerned about.

I didn't know exactly what to make of what they told me, how much was fact, how much was disinformation, how much was misinformation, and even beyond that, why would they come to me? Who am I to do anything with this? You know, if you really had some questions about this, why not take it to someone who's in a much more visible position to be able to expose it, to be able to draw the light of public attention to it, in a way that's effective in getting this line of research to stop? You know, again, I think to myself, I'm a pretty unlikely guy for this.

They gave me the entire involved story, and they said, feel free to take notes unless we tell you to stop, because there were some things that I wasn't allowed to actually take notes on and had to reconstruct those from memory. They could not give me any program names because they were afraid of retaliation, because the program access was so limited. They were sure that those in charge would know who had talked to them, or the pool would be so small that it wouldn't take them long to find out. I asked if I could disseminate this information, and they said, yeah, you may, but you can't use our names. And so I agreed that I would not use their names and keep them anonymous.

I had one other meeting with them several months later in January of 1992. All subsequent contact was by telephone, with the exception of a short conversation when I was handed a floppy disk in a sealed envelope, which I was to forward to Linda Moulton Howe. They had seen her book, Glimpses of Other Realities, and asked if I could put Linda and them in contact. And so I did, and so I was a go-between. I had a phone number and a post office box. That's all I had, and I could call the phone number, I could leave a message, I could send things to the post office box, they would respond if they chose.

I can't make any claims for the truth or the falsity of these claims. It's a disturbing story, and it has some interesting ramifications that no one really wants to deal with. I presented this information at one conference, and I was asked in a very angry way, if this is true, what are we supposed to do about it? Pray? I said, that would be an excellent start. There is no answer to this other than Christ. Jesus Christ is the way, the truth, and the life. He established the exclusivity of the Christian faith in his own words. So if you're gonna start to deal with this, if you wanna deal with it from a position of power, the only way to do this in a way that doesn't lead to the destruction of possibly your personality, your family, your life, is to come at it from a position where you can say, I am Christ. He is my Lord and my Savior, and he has conquered all spiritual powers. If you can do that, then you can face this. It's not necessarily easy, it's not always pleasant. Jesus never said, believe in me, and you're home free. He said, believe in me, and you'll be persecuted. People will hound you, they will disbelieve you. If you see how they've treated me, how much more do you think they'll treat you? So we never come at it from an idea that this is gonna be easy, just that we know who won, and we're on his side.

So I think these men, from what I can determine, were who they said they were. I've had a couple of instances where other researchers picked up on my initial contact and were able to determine that yes, this is a real program, something is going on, and it's opposed by a number of people who are aware of it and or involved with it. So I've had some very good confirmation that these things are happening and that they're real. Again, how much is misinformation or disinformation? I can't say. I think there is a legitimate concern. I believe that Lou Elizondo, when he first came forward as the former director of the ATIP program, that he had run into this exact situation where people in the Pentagon had told him, you can't investigate these, these are demonic, leave them alone. I think this is an offshoot of the concern that these gentlemen had. Are these programs still ongoing? I don't know, but I would be surprised if they weren't. So I would guess that the work has continued and they're trying to refine it and they're trying to still achieve the goal of weaponizing, for lack of a better term, non-human intelligences or psychic powers that seem to emanate from these intelligences.

Do you suspect that these programs that these men, in a sense, blew the whistle to you about, do you suspect that those programs comprehend the government's involvement with the UFO subject? Or is this just one piece of a larger puzzle?

I think this is a small piece of a big puzzle. It includes programs, if you go all the way back to the 1950s with MK-Ultra, the mind control program that the CIA did, which was horrendously damaging to people. If you then move into the 70s and 80s with Project Stargate, the idea of remote viewing, Project Stargate, Grill Flame, all of these attempts at mind control or remote viewing, I think they're all tied together. How much bigger that picture gets, I don't know. But if you look at the idea of, let's say Project Stargate, the remote viewing aspect of it, you're trying to harness an ability that some people certainly seem to have. Now, it's arguable, is that an innate ability with some people that they're able to use? Or is this a case of demonic influence that's allowing these things to happen? My considered opinion is that there are aspects of psychic phenomena that are innate human abilities. Just like some people have perfect pitch, some people have extraordinary gifts of hearing, vision. So I think some of these things are natural abilities. Can I prove it? No. But the fact that the government and serious scientists are committed to studying these things to see can we quantify this? Can we take this human ability, figure out how it works, and can we put it in a machine? Can we put it in a little black box that anybody then can carry around and use? I think that's what they're trying to do. I don't know that it's ever gonna be done, but the scope of what the government does is best described by the warning that President Eisenhower gave as he was leaving office, to beware of the military-industrial complex. The exponential increase in black budget programs from 1960, when I believe he gave that speech, to today is mind-boggling. There is so much money that's spent on things no one knows what they're being spent on that I cannot imagine the scope of the entire picture. I would be extraordinarily interested in finding out who has the big picture view of this. Who knows the entire scope of things that are being explored and how deeply they're going.

It's definitely a small part of a much bigger picture and a much more complex picture that includes things like the recent publicity about something called the Havana Syndrome that has affected diplomats and diplomatic staff. I understand why they don't explain a lot of it to us. Sources, methods, those sorts of things that must remain secret and sometimes the actual information can't be extricated from the sources and the methods. So they have to keep something secret. At the same time, seeing the government actively work to destroy the foundations of civilization, the family, and faith. If we see them actively doing that, should we be surprised that they're not doing something to dig even deeper into what any believer would call the occult because if you abandon the truth of Christ, you either have anarchy or you impose another system. And the ability of Christians to openly voice what they believe in the public square has been drastically reduced over the last 40 years. And the fact that speaking Christian truth can sometimes get you fired from your job, get you silenced on social media, land you in jail. I'm thinking of the folks who were singing hymns in an abortion clinic and were arrested and spent time in jail for it. But that's the attitude of our culture, our society, and our government. So if you leave the Christian consensus, what are you going to replace it with? It's got to be another philosophy, which is either totalitarian, authoritarian, or completely evil and morally corrupt.

What the government's capable of doing is, I think, beyond our ability to understand why they would wanna do it. That's a philosophical question that I think we can answer because they've abandoned the Christian consensus. And once you do that, everything's fair game. Western society, Western civilization is built on the Christian consensus. And once you lose that, you see the destruction of society. Yeah, and you're gonna end up searching for a new revelation or a new religion to found your society upon. The one that benefits you because it's about power, but one that can also fit in a post-Christian context. So you end up with Egypt and Babylon revived. I echo the words of John in the Book of Revelation, Maranatha, come quickly, Lord Jesus. I'm certainly not an end times focuser, but I think anytime you see the erosion of society, the erosion of Christian morality, you have to start thinking in terms of, this is not good. Lord, don't know when you're coming, but could you make it soon?

If you want to learn more about Ray's story, you can also check out his academia.edu page, or you can pick up the book, Final Events by researcher Nick Redfern, who discovered a larger group of Christians within the government who echoed the concerns of Ray's contacts, a group that we will touch on in our final episodes.

But in our next episode, we are going to change gears as we look at the final decades leading up to the current push for UFO disclosure. And so that will bring us to episode eight on the acclimatization process.

# OUTRO

4 bouts of science and adventure in the universe. Learn more at access0.org

Check over at contact, Roger. Don't let them know where you're going, this is like a problem. I'm the O-round. Alright, the O-round, definitely the O-round. Like a bug. Roger.

Oh my gosh, man. Wow, what a surprise! Thanks for watching!
