# INTRO

I don't think it's bird, I don't think it's bug. I think it's exactly what a UFO stands for, unidentified flying object.

We did discover and explore many, many things in ways that frankly at the beginning look almost like a miracle. And then as we go forward, there's like something new we never would have guessed.

Hey, hey! Unexplained sightings of flying objects in the sky for decades. The space agency launching a new team to investigate who or what may be behind the unexplained sightings.

Just last month, this video shot on an iPhone during an air show in Miami appears to show something shooting up out of the water with people swimming nearby.

Of unidentified aerial phenomena, UAP, or what we all call unidentified flying objects.

And I saw it, I was like, what in the, like no way!

# PODCAST

Utah dialogue

So far in this series we have been operating under three assumptions. One, that there is substance to the phenomenon known as UFOs or UAPs. Two, that the UFO or UAP phenomenon didn't begin in 1947, but has been with us throughout our history and has been rising exponentially since the Renaissance and the Enlightenment. And three, that there is a connection between what is commonly called the occult and the UFO phenomenon.

And as we have observed, what the Bible says about the spiritual realm and the reality of angels and demons fits right in with much of what is called the UFO phenomenon. And yet due to the nature of the phenomenon, coupled with the secular assumption that denies a spirit realm or other dimensions of existence, the government and other cultural institutions that are largely based upon secularism have engaged in a concerted cover-up of the UFO phenomenon.

However, as we considered in the first episode, that conversation has been shifting in recent years to where the government, the media, and even academia are now considering the phenomenon to not only be real, but also worthy of our study and consideration. And as we are going to consider in this episode, this change didn't come out of nowhere. It's actually the fruition of a decades-long process of acclimatization to the reality of the phenomenon by our culture's most trusted institutions. This change has occurred through the concerted efforts of government and intelligence officials, through the dedication of grassroots activists, and as I will argue, through the activity of the phenomenon itself.

So as we examine the acclimatization process of the late 20th and early 21st century, we are going to examine the government and intelligence community's efforts. We are going to examine the activity of the phenomenon itself, and we are going to examine and touch on the efforts of a dedicated group of activists from both inside and outside of the government who helped to push this subject out into the mainstream discourse.

How long do we keep this to ourselves? Well, there's no telling. We will determine that.

Why? I think mankind has the right to know about something as significant as this.

Well, yes, of course. We don't intend to keep this under wraps forever.

Right. Okay. Good. Fine.

Now, the clip that you just heard is from the Roswell movie that we cited in earlier episodes, where the formation of the Majestic 12 is dramatized for the viewing audience. And embedded in that narrative is the idea that the US government planned to cover up the UFO phenomenon only for a time, but that eventually they recognized that they would have to tell the truth to the American public because you simply can't deny reality forever.

Now this is an idea that was floated around in UFO circles in the 1980s and 1990s, that the government was seeking to eventually disclose the truth and that the UFO community was being embedded with intelligence operatives who were helping to spur that process along. This would largely be the working assumption in UFO subculture in the 1980s with the work of men like Bill Moore and others, men who openly claimed to have contact with members of the military and intelligence communities.

In fact, a shadowy group would emerge in the 1980s and the 1990s known as the Aviary, who would claim to be just that, military and intelligence operatives who were either working on behalf of the government to plant the seeds of disclosure or who were themselves seeking to force the upper echelons of the government and the intelligence community to disclose the truth.

So who was the Aviary? Who were these men who were claiming this about themselves? Well the title of the group and the code names given to the members was largely the creation of again UFO researcher Bill Moore, the man who uncovered the Roswell story and who received and promoted the majestic 12 documents. And the concept of an Aviary was first presented to the public on a mass scale through a documentary that he participated in called UFO Cover-Up Live, a documentary which aired on over 100 stations across the United States in 1988.

And while much can be said about the documentary and the information that was presented in the documentary, for example, Area 51 is mentioned in the film, a full year before the story of the secretive base would go viral with the story of Bob Lazar in Las Vegas. Yet for our purposes here, what's significant about UFO Cover-Up Live was that much of the information presented in the documentary was presented by figures shrouded in silhouettes whose voices were altered to protect their identity.

Well Colonel Coleman, Colonel Friend, thank you both. While we're on the subject of Blue Book, let's hear another view from a scientist currently working for the government. Now because he has insisted on anonymity, both his appearance and his voice have been altered. But his credentials have been thoroughly researched by the investigative team of Bill Moore and Jamie Chanderay. They've given him the code name Condor.

And as they are introduced throughout the documentary, these Aviary members are identified as ranking members of the military and intelligence establishments. But what is particularly interesting about them, and this is where the name Aviary comes from, is that as you heard, they were each given bird names to protect their identity. According to long-time researcher Grant Cameron, some of the Aviary members were as follows.

The Blue Jay, that was Dr. Christopher or Kit Green, MD, PhD, Chief Biomedical Sciences Department, General Motors, former head of the CIA's UFO files at the weird desk.

The Pelican, Dr. Ron Pandolfi, CIA Deputy Director for the Division of Science and Technology and current custodian of UFO files at the quote weird desk, may be involved in the White House initiative to promptly release UFO information to the public. As a side note, Ron received that job after the retirement of Kit Green.

The Owl, Al Putoff, physicist with the Institute for Advanced Research in Austin, Texas.

The Penguin, John Alexander, PhD, Lieutenant Colonel, US Army Intelligence and Security Command.

The Condor, Captain Bob Collins, US Air Force, retired. Special Agent, Air Force Office of Special Investigations or AFOSI. Engaged in UFO related intelligence operations, reportedly appeared clandestinely on the 1988 television program UFO Cover-Up Live.

The Falcon or the Sparrow. According to Grant, many have fingered Sergeant Richard Dick Doty, US Air Force retired Special Agent, Air Force Office of Special Investigations or AFOSI.

The Partridge, Dr. Jacques Vallee.

Chicken Little, Dan Smith, civilian UFO researcher, volunteer liaison with Dr. Ronald Pandolfi.

And there are several others that I have not mentioned in Cameron's list, but you might recognize some of the names I just recounted to you. For example, Dr. Hal Putoff is the physicist and former Scientologist who is currently a part of Tom DeLonge's To The Stars organization. Captain Bob Collins or the Condor was the man whom you just heard from in the UFO Cover-Up Live clip. In fact, Bob Collins would write a book with UFO researcher Richard Dolan entitled The Black World of UFOs Exempt From Disclosure, where he would confirm the existence in the identities of certain members of the aviary. And of course, Richard Doty and Jacques Vallee, who were mentioned in previous episodes, are listed as members along with Colonel John Alexander, who remember George Clooney's character was based upon in the movie The Men Who Stare at Goats.

But members of the aviary not only seem to operate as a more public version of the infamous Majestic Twelve, some have even surmised that they may actually be whatever can be likened to a MJ-12 group. In fact, many of them were involved with the promotion of the MJ-12 documents. But the members of this group would remain active in the years and decades ahead. In many ways, they appear to be the inner circle of what Jacques Vallee dubbed the Invisible College, as Jacques Vallee himself was purported to be a member of the aviary and Dr. Hal Pudoff has been associated with members of the Invisible College up until our present day.

But you see, the significance of the aviary is that not only were they active military and intelligence officials, but it's also that they were really at the center of the creation of the UFO subculture in the 1980s and 90s. And they appeared to be instrumental in planting the seeds of the Roswell story, the Majestic Twelve story, the stories surrounding Area 51 and alien abductions, and just about everything else that would make an appearance in science fiction movies in the 1990s and in docudramas like Unsolved Mysteries and Sightings and Ancient Aliens in the decades ahead.

But the story of UFOs and government cover-ups would especially go viral in 1989, when a purported scientist and whistleblower showed up on Las Vegas' KLAS news station with reporter George Knapp.

Totally impossible. The propulsion system is a gravity propulsion system. The power source is an antimatter reactor. This technology does not exist at all.

The claims sounded like Hollywood sci-fi. Months later, when his identity was revealed, Bob Lazar said he worked at a secret facility near Groom Lake, where alien technology was being reverse engineered.

Now if you aren't familiar, what you just heard was the voice of a man named Bob Lazar, who claimed to work at Area 51 in a super-secret, clandestine part of the base known as Area S4. Bob claimed that the US government was in possession of nine flying saucers at Area S4, one of which he was tasked with attempting to reverse engineer, that is, to try to figure out how it worked so that the technology could be duplicated and manufactured. And while at the base, he was presented with briefing documents that claimed that the famous gray aliens present in alien abductions were the origin of the technology that he was tasked to study. And the same documents claimed that these beings originated from the Zeta Reticuli star system.

Bob also claimed that he was invited to view the testing of the craft, and that he was aware of the regular schedule for the testing of the flying disk, which he would later record with his friends from a distance outside of the base. However, due to marriage breakdown related to his secretive behavior in disappearing to the base for days at a time without a good reason being given to his wife, the intelligence team tasked with surveilling employees at Area 51 began to see Bob as a security risk because of the breakdown of his marriage. This led to negative interactions with his employer, which caused him to react with paranoia. This would then lead to intimidation tactics being used against Bob, including breaking into his car, stealing his own guns, and shooting out his tires on the freeway. And so out of fear for his life, through his close friend, John Lear, he reached out to George Knapp, a reporter at KLAS, in order to tell his story, and well, the rest then became history.

Now what's interesting about all of this that many people miss is that before Bob even received the position at Area 51, he was already friends with John Lear, who was the son of Bill Lear, the inventor of the Learjet. Now John Lear was himself an accomplished test pilot who broke several records in aviation, and interestingly enough, he was also employed by the CIA for a time. But what's significant about Bob's relationship to John Lear is that Mr. Lear was already becoming a prolific UFO conspiracy theorist who was well known in the UFO subculture of the 1980s, again, the very culture that the intelligence and government officials associated with the aviary were apparently instrumental in creating. And Bob has said that when he was interviewed for the position out at Area 51, he was specifically asked about his relationship to John Lear. In fact, John Lear is the one who suggested that Bob apply for a job at Area 51. This has led many to surmise, including George Knapp and Bob himself, that perhaps Bob was chosen to sow the story of UFOs, Area 51, and government cover-ups into the public consciousness. The idea is that Bob was profiled as someone who would run his mouth if the pressure was put on him, and that he had a built-in outlet in John Lear, who was also close to George Knapp, the K-L-A-S reporter, who was already on the subject of UFOs at the time. And so all the managers needed to do at Area 51 was to bring Bob out to the base several times, share some tech and some info or disinfo with him, and then scare the pants off of him so that he would begin to run his mouth to his well-connected friends.

And whether or not that is exactly what happened with Bob, the story that he brought to the public went viral. The story of Area 51 UFOs and the government's reverse engineering program went international after Knapp's report. Area 51 even had to expand its borders to keep onlookers from trying to get in close to try to see the flying saucer tests that Bob reported. And the story of Bob Lazar and Area 51 would permanently be etched into the public consciousness.

In fact, in 2018, filmmaker Jeremy Corbell would release a film entitled Bob Lazar, Area 51, and Flying Saucers, which would largely defend Bob's credibility while retelling the story in light of recent government transparency surrounding the subject of UFOs. As a side note, it's also interesting to note that both Jeremy Corbell and Tom DeLonge have shared photos of themselves with George Knapp in a suburban traveling out to some secretive location in the desert prior to the events of December 2017, which Tom DeLonge and the New York Times helped to bring about.

But Corbell's documentary would in many ways reinforce the growing narrative that UFOs needed to be taken seriously, just as Bob Lazar needed to be taken seriously. And dancers like Joe Rogan have even credited the film with reigniting their interest in the subject.

And so between the aviary in the 1980s and the 1990s and viral stories of whistleblowers like Bob Lazar, the subject of UFOs was becoming more and more sexy in the mainstream media and more and more appealing to conspiracy subculture.

But it wasn't just whistleblowers who would drive the subject forward, it was also members of the government itself.

Recent release of Pentagon footage of unidentified aerial phenomena and things like Project Blue Book and A-TIP and all of these various things, in your former position and currently with the current information that's released, what's your viewpoint on what these objects that seem to defy all laws of physics are? It's a legitimate question now.

And the short answer, but not the most meaningful one is I don't know about this. But when I was president and I had a chief of staff, John Podesta, who loves science fiction, we made every attempt to find out everything about Roswell. And we also sent people to Area 51 to make sure there were no aliens in it because Area 51 is very important.

Who did you send? Who do you send to Area 51?

Oh, if I told you that.

What President Clinton is referring to is what many have called the Clinton UFO effort or the Clinton UFO initiative. This was a program that involved Clinton's assistant and deputy chief of staff, John Podesta, a man who continues to be active not only in politics, but who also continues to be active with UFO disclosure, along with other people like billionaire Lawrence Rockefeller and even members of the aviary like Dr. Ron Pandolfi or the Pelican, as he was called. Even Hillary Clinton was involved and was famously photographed at Rockefeller's estate carrying a book entitled Are We Alone by Paul Davies.

Now while the Clinton initiative would be unsuccessful in uncovering the truth about Roswell, which was one of its main goals, it would actually lead to the Air Force's 1997 press conference where they would make the claim that Roswell was a top secret weather balloon. Yet the initiative would set the precedent that it's okay for elected officials to dig deep and to try to uncover the truth of the subject of UFOs in the name of government transparency. And as the US Congress continues to pursue transparency surrounding the subject of UFOs, we see a continuation of this precedent that was set by the Clinton administration and their allies.

But it wasn't just government officials and whistleblowers who worked to acclimatize the public in the late decades of the 20th century. It was also the phenomenon itself.

It's often said that the general public only truly cares about a subject if it affects them personally. Think back to Clinton's famous statement in running his campaign that it's the economy that's stupid. That's because the economy affects people. And while large sections of the American public do believe that there is something to the UFO subject, perhaps even evidence of alien contact that the government is hiding from them, yet apart from the saucers landing on the White House lawn, for most people it is nothing more than a passing interest or hobby. However, if the pilots of said UFOs can supposedly whisk you away while performing all sorts of painful and humiliating experiments on you, and if there's nothing that you or anyone else can do about it, well then now you're invested because maybe you will be next.

And that's precisely what occurred in the 1980s and going into the 1990s with reports of alien abductions. Now stories of alien abductions go back for decades and even arguably for millennia. For example, even St. Augustine in the City of God spoke of nighttime sexual encounters with incubi and succubi as being something that was real, and yet, as he interpreted it, demonic. In the Middle Ages, there were the fairy and sylph kidnappings, which Jacques Vallee alludes to in his book Passport to Magonia. Even in the modern era, during the airship waves above Northern California, there were accounts of beings attempting to kidnap citizens who came across them and got too close in the middle of the night. And during the saucer fever of the 1940s, 50s, and 60s, there were various waves of contactees who came forward with bizarre stories of alien contact. And while the contactees of the 1950s claimed to meet with human-like aliens who preached peace to them while teaching them various new age and communistic doctrines, there were others whose stories were much more frightening.

Now, the clip that you are hearing is from the hypnotic regression of Betty and Barney Hill, one of the earliest victims of so-called alien abduction. Their story grabbed national attention, as their story was one of the first accounts of not simply having contact with aliens, but of being kidnapped by aliens. Their story is told in the book Interrupted Journey, where the memories that were uncovered through hypnotic regression are woven together into a compelling and yet frightening narrative of being taken from a lonesome highway in New Hampshire by the pilots of a UFO.

And while a whole episode could focus on their case alone, for our purposes here, what is significant about the Hill story is that it would eventually come to characterize alien abduction accounts around the world. Things with slanted eyes and bulbous heads, who take victims against their will onto a flying saucer, who seem to be able to paralyze their victims so that they can't resist, and who then perform strange and even sexual experiments on the abductees, while sometimes sharing some information about themselves with the abductee, only to return them to the place of abduction with their memories wiped clean. This all began with the story of Betty and Barney Hill. And like it was with them, and as it often is, only through hypnotic regression can the full memories be recovered, though abductees often claim to have bizarre screen memories that indicate to them that something happened, along with a missing period of time that they cannot account for.

And in the Hill's case, it was not only memories of a UFO, but also the missing time and strange dreams that led them to contact the Air Force and to report their sighting. Interestingly enough, at their Unitarian church, they then later sat in on a lecture by an Air Force captain named Ben Sweat on the practice of hypnotic regression. This led them into a conversation with Captain Sweat, where he encouraged them to seek out professional hypnotic regression to recover their memories.

So think about it. Even with the first widely publicized story of alien abductions, we find the phenomenon itself. Government officials like Captain Sweat and the Blue Book officials that the Hills reported their case to. But even heretical Christian churches, like the Unitarian church that they were a member of, coming together and being a part of the UFO narrative going mainstream.

And in the decades ahead, more stories would come to the public's attention, though the Hills were indeed the first. In 1975, Travis Woulton would be taken in front of his logging crew in the woods near Snowflake, Arizona, only to be returned five days later. His account would later be dramatized in the 1993 movie Fire in the Sky, starring D.B. Sweeney as Travis Woulton.

And throughout the 70s and 80s, psychologists and psychiatrists would encounter patients who seemed to be free of mental illness, who yet recounted strange stories of being sexually assaulted by road workers in the middle of the night in the middle of nowhere, or who encountered talking animals in the woods that led them to experience missing time and even strange encounters that occurred in their bedrooms that didn't seem to add up to anything normal. This eventually led to researchers like Bud Hopkins and Dr. David Jacobs to begin the practice of hypnotically regressing those who reported these strange encounters and missing time in order to recover their memories.

Even Dr. John Mack, the head of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School, would investigate the phenomenon and come to the conclusion that the experiences were real and not due to any form of mental illness. He actually found experiencers to be quite psychologically healthy apart from the trauma that they experienced from their encounters. And what these researchers uncovered were not only frightening stories, but also oddly similar stories coming from a diverse group of patients who had virtually no contact or relationship with one another.

And while these stories would grab media attention, for example, abduction stories were at the center of the UFO cover-up live event, one experiencer in particular would recount a story that would forever embed itself into the popular imagination.

Whitley Strieber was a fiction author residing in New York City who had a series of strange encounters at his cabin in upstate New York in 1985 which would lead to uncovering memories of alien abduction through hypnotic regression. He would then publish his account in the 1987 book entitled Communion. While the book would have almost no marketing behind it, it would quickly rise to become a New York Times bestseller as the depiction of the alien on the cover with its stoic, almost Mona Lisa-like smile and the large, upturned, jet-black almond eyes. That image would arrest the attention of those perusing through bookstores so that they felt compelled to pick up the book and read it. In fact, Strieber would receive thousands of letters from readers who thanked him for his book because they had experienced the same thing but thought they were going crazy. Some even claimed that the book itself led them to have their own encounters, which traditionalist philosopher Charles Upton compares to a form of sympathetic magic or to the practice of inducing a spell upon someone through a symbolic association. The symbolic association here being the cover of Strieber's book.

But after the publishing of Strieber's book, the image of an alien as a gray or pale being with a head shaped like an upside-down pear and jet-black, slanted, almond eyes became a cultural icon. In many ways, Jacques Vallee's observation that the phenomenon seeks to alter mass consciousness through these bizarre, clandestine experiences imposed on just a few which then goes out to percolate through the entire culture. That observation of Vallee can be observed in how Strieber's story affected mass culture.

Like Vallee, Strieber surmises in his book that his abductors may even be fairies. He actually refuses to identify them as space aliens. And while Strieber admits that it was initially frightening, rather than portray his experiences as only being negative, he came to view it as a positive and spiritually enlightening experience. The title of his book, Communion, is even a play on words. It's a play on religious terminology as Strieber was raised as a relatively devout Roman Catholic. And so Strieber's presentation placed an aura of intrigue around the subject, though it seemed terrifying to many.

But going into the 1990s, the combination of aviary-inspired UFO subculture and the widespread reports of UFO abductions would capture the popular imagination through shows like The X-Files and NBC's Dark Skies. Docudrama shows like Sightings and Unsolved Mysteries would also deal with the subject of UFOs, government cover-ups, and alien abductions. Strieber's own story would be dramatized in 1989 with Christopher Walken starring as Strieber in the movie Communion. Movies like Men in Black and Independence Day would sensationalize these beliefs through CGI and Hollywood A-listers.

So also through the emerging conspiracy subculture of the 1990s, a movement that spawned everyone from William Cooper to Alex Jones to the Michigan militia to even terrorists like Timothy McVeigh. Through this movement, belief in a clandestine government cover-up involving alien races who were being allowed to take Americans at will found fertile soil. And that soil would indeed go mainstream in the decades ahead, especially after the 2016 election.

But through the influence of government and intelligence officials and through the influence of the phenomenon itself, the subject of UFOs and UFO disclosure was slowly entering into the mainstream discourse, even if it was through silly movies and through popular internet conspiracy theories. In fact, the producer of Dark Skies, Bryce Zabel, would even claim that naval intelligence officials would visit him and share true stories with him for him to write into the script of his show. Indeed, in the 1990s, the public was being actively acclimatized to the subject by the government, by the media, by various subcultures, and even by the phenomenon itself.

This arguably came to a headway with the efforts of Dr. Steven Greer, a former emergency room doctor who claimed to be a lifelong experiencer, who began researching the UFO phenomenon and collecting witnesses from within the government and the military and the intelligence communities while even working with members of the Clinton administration at times to push for UFO disclosure. Dr. Greer's witnesses would not only testify to the reality of UFOs, but they would also testify to the reality of the cover-up while stating that they would be willing to testify under oath before Congress about what they knew. In addition, Dr. Greer would also develop protocols for peaceful contact with the phenomenon, known as the CE-5 Protocols or Close Encounters of the Fifth Kind Protocols, where individuals would be trained to go out into the wilderness and to engage in various meditations and visualization rituals in order to initiate peaceful contact with UFOs and with their occupants.

If you watch the documentary Serious Disclosure that features Dr. Steven Greer, the rituals and protocols remind one of the rituals and protocols of men like John Dee, Emanuel Swedenborg, and Jack Parsons. But you see, in a culture that was increasingly becoming convinced that there was something true and yet terrifying about this phenomenon, something that the government was hiding from us, Dr. Greer came in to, yes, prove that there was indeed a cover-up, but to also quell those fears by holding out the promise of a better world, a world free from war and from pollution, if we would only get our act together and change our beliefs and seek out direct contact with the peaceful and enlightened beings who were behind the UFO phenomenon.

In other words, like Streber, Dr. Greer put forward the idea that salvation was possible if we would only seek out communion with these beings. Dr. Greer then launched the Disclosure Project, which held a press conference at the National Press Club on May 9, 2001, where Dr. Greer's most impressive witnesses were brought forth before the media in order to give their testimony and to demand a congressional investigation into the subject.

UFO matter and extraterrestrial intelligence can prove and will prove that we are not alone.

And while this effort would be largely unsuccessful in lighting off any sort of mainstream push for UFO disclosure, it would get the attention of many who were already paying attention to this subject, including yours truly. In fact, a budding reporter and a famous punk rocker who wrote a song entitled Aliens Exist would be paying attention to Dr. Greer and would decide to do their own investigations and who would decide to start their own initiatives, which we will examine in our next episode, which will be entitled Punk Rock and UFO Fight Club, where we will continue to examine this acclimatization process in the early 2000s up until our present day.

Thank you.