# INTRO

I don't think it's bird, I don't think it's bug. I think it's exactly what a UFO stands for, an unidentified flying object.

We did discover and explore many, many things in ways that frankly at the beginning look almost like a miracle. And then as we go forward, it looks like something new we never would have guessed.

Hey, hey! Unexplained sightings of flying objects in the sky for decades. The space agency launching a new team to investigate who or what may be behind the unexplained site.

Just last month, this video shot on an iPhone during an air show in Miami appears to show something shooting up out of the water with people swimming nearby.

Of unidentified aerial phenomena, UAP, or what we all call unidentified flying objects.

When I saw it, I was like, what in the, like no way!

# PODCAST

This is Episode 5, Top Secret Magic.

The following clip is from a 1994 Showtime film called Roswell, the UFO Cover-Up. The clip I am about to play comes from the climax of the movie where Major Jesse Marcell, who is played by Kyle McClackian, finally discovers the full truth about the Roswell crash and the ensuing cover-up from a shadowy intelligence figure played by Martin Sheen. After revealing that bodies were discovered at the Roswell crash site, and after revealing that the bodies were studied by the Army Air Force, Marcell is then informed of a secretive government group, a group which is commonly known in UFO circles as the Majestic 12.

And our mandate exactly, to investigate the event and all of its implications. The technology. And any other such events, should they occur. But most of all, to safeguard the public interest. That's why this information has to be so carefully controlled. Think of our religious institutions. I mean, if this were all to just come out, what are people going to believe in? Not to mention the effect on our social and our political institutions. Even the military. Especially the military. I mean, what the hell are we dealing with here? Is it friendly? Is it hostile? Maybe it's me, or maybe they're just studying us, the way we study insects. Well, the point is, there could be panic if this all came out. We're supposed to ensure domestic tranquility, not eliminate it. I mean, what? What if people think that we are not in control of the skies? That'd be right.

What about leaks? Someone's bound to say something.

Well, as long as we control the way the information is released, leaks shouldn't necessarily hurt us. In fact, mingle with a little well-placed disinformation. They should help.

Oakeses. Oh, yes, certainly. And also, accurate information released from less than reputable sources. That's not such a bad technique either. Recruit a group of crackpots.

Exactly.

Now, in putting together this scene, the writers and the producers clearly did their homework on UFO lore. You see, for a decade prior to the making of the film, it became widespread knowledge in UFO subculture and in conspiracy circles that a group was formed which supposedly covered up the Roswell event and other events while also secretly studying UFO crash remains in order to back-engineer the technology while also managing the story in the public consciousness.

And while there has been little doubt, even among skeptics, that the UFO subject has been managed by the US government for its own purposes, a secretive government group that engages in psyops against the American public while also being above congressional oversight would not only be unethical, it would be downright illegal.

In fact, as we continue to see UFO disclosure pushed into the mainstream discourse, many are arguing that not only does such a secretive group exist, but that exposing it and bringing it under congressional oversight is what will cause the house of cards surrounding the UFO cover-up to finally come tumbling down.

But what is the Majestic 12? Does it actually exist? And where did the idea come from that such a group exists? Well, in order to answer those questions, we need to fast-forward from where we were in the UFO timeline in the 1940s, 50s, and 60s, and we need to bring ourselves to the 1980s, when the Roswell story was being resurrected by researchers such as Bill Moore and Stanton Friedman.

Now, it is well known that Bill Moore had connections within the intelligence community, a fact that he was very open about, and a fact that he would later come to regret towards the end of his career as he was convinced that he had been used by the intelligence community for their own purposes at a certain level.

But the narrative of the Majestic 12, or the MJ-12 documents, would begin with his friend and filmmaker, Jamie Shandera, who received a mysterious package in the mail in 1984. The package contained an undeveloped roll of film that, upon being developed, showed photographs of documents that were related to a top-secret briefing that was prepared for Dwight D. Eisenhower on November 18, 1952.

The document states, Operation Majestic 12 is a top-secret research and development slash intelligence operation responsible directly and only to the President of the United States. Operations of the project are carried out under control of the Majestic 12, Magic 12 Group, which was established by special classified executive order of President Truman on 24 September 1947, upon recommendation by Dr. Vannevar Bush and Secretary James Forrestal.

The document then goes on to narrate the events of the summer of 1947 and the events known as the Roswell Crash. The document says on 07 July 1947, a secret operation was begun to assure recovery of the wreckage of this object for scientific study. During the course of this operation, aerial reconnaissance discovered that four small human-like beings had apparently ejected from the crash at some point before it exploded. All four were dead and badly decomposed due to action by predators and exposure to the elements during the approximately one-week time period which had elapsed before their discovery."

The document then describes how a cover-up was initiated with the weather balloon story and how the group organized a study effort to harness the technology and to understand the origins and the motives of the extraterrestrial biological entities, or EBEs as the document calls them.

And all of this appears in a document that was apparently put together to brief then-President-elect Eisenhower on the existence of this group that was set up by his predecessor, President Harry Truman.

But what is particularly interesting about the documents is who they identify as being a part of the Majestic 12. The men included were Admiral Roscoe H. Hillenkotter, Dr. Vannevar Bush, Secretary James Horstel, General Nathan Twining, General Hoyt S. Vandenberg, Dr. Detlev Bronk, Dr. Jerome Hunsaker, Mr. Sidney W. Sowers, Mr. Gordon Gray, Dr. Donald Menzel, General Robert M. Montague, and Dr. Lloyd Berkner.

Now, as even skeptics will admit, this is not only an impressive list of figures from the time, but it's also a plausible list of men who would be included in such a group if it did indeed exist. It almost seems too good to be true.

Now, to just give you some background on these men, Dr. Lloyd Berkner was intimately involved with the Robertson panel that we mentioned in our previous episode. Remember, that was the CIA panel that recommended UFOs be ridiculed and debunked in the mainstream media due to national security reasons. So also, when it comes to UFO debunking, Dr. Detlev Bronk worked with Dr. Edward Condon, the man who closed Project Blue Book with the Condon Report that was named after him, a report that many on the committee claimed was horribly biased. So also, Dr. Donald Menzel was a well-known UFO debunker, and he later admitted that he had a top-secret security clearance, and that in his role as a professor at Harvard, he was working for the intelligence community.

So individuals mentioned in the document were apparently involved in the cover-up of saucer fever, or they were at least seeking to downplay the subject and debunk it in the public eye. But on the other hand, other alleged members of the group were quite positive about UFOs at times. For example, Vice Admiral Roscoe Hillenkotter, who was the third director of the CIA, was relatively open about his views that UFOs were in fact real. In fact, Hillenkotter served on the board of NICAP, the first civilian research organization focused on UFOs. General Nathan Twining was also another Pentagon official who studied UFOs. A now declassified document from September of 1947 has Twining observing to his correspondent that, quote, the phenomenon reported is something real and not visionary or fictitious.

So individuals mentioned in the document were apparently involved in the cover-up of saucer fever, or they were at least seeking to downplay the subject and debunk it in the public eye. But on the other hand, other alleged members of the group were quite positive about UFOs at times. For example, Vice Admiral Roscoe Hillenkotter, who was the third director of the CIA, was relatively open about his views that UFOs were in fact real. In fact, Hillenkotter served on the board of NICAP, the first civilian research organization focused on UFOs. General Nathan Twining was also another Pentagon official who studied UFOs. A now declassified document from September of 1947 has Twining observing to his correspondent that, quote, the phenomenon reported is something real and not visionary or fictitious.

And much more could be said about these individuals and the several others who are included in the document. But what is significant about the profile of these men is that they would not only be qualified to study the UFO phenomenon and UFO technology and UFO inhabitants, if such things are indeed real, but that many of them were openly and or covertly involved with this subject in the public eye, either by promoting it and being involved with the development of UFO subculture. They would again think of Hillenkotter and sitting on the board of NICAP, or they were involved by debunking and ridiculing the subject in the public eye.

In other words, the behavior of some of these men fits in perfectly with the agenda recounted in the movie clip that we opened up with. The agenda of covering up the subject while also controlling how it is leaked out to the public.

But the question still remains, are these documents real? Was there a majestic 12? Well, we have to admit up front that even if the list of men is impressive, that doesn't mean that such a group existed. Again, it could be argued that the list is too good to be true, that anyone knowing the background of these men could fabricate these documents and create a plausible scenario where they were all working together to study, exploit and cover up the UFO story, while also managing the public consciousness surrounding the subject.

However, there is much more that can be said about these documents than just the content. First off, a former member of the Truman administration, David Stowe, said that based upon style, format and content, that the documents do appear to be legitimately from that time period. So also, documents from the Truman Presidential Archives concur that some of the meetings that the MJ-12 documents alleged to have occurred between Truman, Dr. Vannevar Bush and Secretary Forrestal did indeed occur on the dates stated in the documents. So also, President-elect Eisenhower did receive a 45-minute briefing on November 18, 1952, which still remains classified, and General Nathan Twining, a man mentioned in the documents, was present at those briefings.

Forensic investigations also seem to concur that the document was prepared on typewriters that were used at the time by the U.S. government. Even the dating style, which at first glance seems to be not common for the time, was used by Hillenkotter, who was the man who apparently prepared the MJ-12 documents, if they are real. It seems that any time a discrepancy was found in the MJ-12 documents, researchers found that even minute details were accurate to the time, even if those details were not commonly found in other government documents.

UFO skeptic Philip Klaas famously offered Stanton Friedman $100 per document up to $1,000 if Friedman could produce documents from the time that included some of the curious features found in the MJ-12 documents. Friedman ended up finding over 20, and Klaas, being a man of his word, ended up paying him the promised $1,000.

However, it's not that the documents are without trouble. For example, one researcher has produced evidence that the typewriter that was used wasn't in use until 1966, over a decade after the alleged briefing date in 1952. Another major issue with the documents is that the signature from Harry Truman seems to be virtually identical to his signature from another document found in the Truman Library. And while some have disputed this, most do not.

And yet, if you think about it, if the signature were lifted and pasted from another Truman document, then the person who forged the MJ-12 documents would have had to have had access to such a document in order to lift the signature. So clearly, if the documents were hoaxed, whoever the hoaxer was was not some random UFO crackpot or some kid in his mom's basement. The person would have had to know intricate details about government documents and typewriters from the time. They would have had to have known the personal schedules of President Truman and of his cabinet members. And they would have had to have known and had access to documents with Truman's signature on them so that they could lift them and paste them into the forged documents.

In other words, if the MJ-12 documents are indeed a hoax, they would have to be a hoax by someone from within the government or the intelligence community. A similar line of reasoning has been applied to the contemporary QAnon movement. The QAnon movement seems by many to just be too well organized and orchestrated and targeted towards a specific population to simply be a hoax run by some kid on 8chan. It seems to be some sort of intelligence operation, whether it's originating from our own intelligence community or the intelligence community of a foreign nation.

And so a similar thing could be said about the majestic 12 documents. They are just too involved to be hoaxed by ordinary citizens.

But you see, the smoking gun for the idea that the MJ-12 documents were fabricated by members of the intelligence community seems to be that the recipient of the document was good friends with Bill Moore. And again, Bill Moore was a man with connections from within the intelligence community. In fact, one of Moore's connections was a man named Richard Doty who worked for the Air Force Office of Special Investigations, or AFOSI for short. An office known to deal with psychological operations and disinformation. Doty, who continues to be involved with the UFO community, has actually admitted to engaging in psyops while working at AFOSI out of Kirtland Air Force Base.

In September of 2022, on the Fade to Black radio program, which is hosted by Jimmy Church, Doty admitted to being involved with such an operation in relation to UFO researcher Linda Moulton Howe, who was making a UFO documentary at the time for HBO.

You have to provide some real information in order for your target to believe it. And it may be just a little bit, or it may be a lot, in order for them to buy into it. And then you have people that are very smart that you're dealing with, such as Linda Howe. We needed to find her sources. We knew, I got involved in this late. There were other agencies involved in this operation. We knew that she was coming to, and I'm not going to go into great details of how we knew all this stuff, but we knew what she was doing. We knew where she was going. We knew who she was talking to for the most part. And we knew she was coming to Albuquerque. And so she was invited by me through Jerry Miller, who worked with me, to the base. And I was going to talk to her and show her something that would help her with her HBO special. So she came out to the base, and like you said, she was in a room, way mirror. There were agents on the other side filming her. Plus there was a camera inside. We had a microphone in there too. She was fully aware that we were filming.

Now, to be fair to Mr. Doty, while he admitted that he was involved with such operations being now outside of the government, he has now said that he was simply following orders. And he has given indications that perhaps he might regret some of the actions he was ordered to take. But he has said that he himself and those in the AFOSI did have access to real UFO information that they were seeking to leak out to the public. A fact that we will consider when we examine the acclimatization process in a future episode.

And there is good reason to suspect that Doty was involved at some level with either the release of the MJ-12 documents or the production of them, if they are indeed a hoax. As I mentioned earlier, Doty was working with Bill Moore in his research on UFOs and on the Roswell crash. Also researcher Richard Dolan, in his first volume of UFOs in the National Security State, he recounts that as Moore and Shandera traveled to the modern military branch of the National Archives, that they received strange postcards that directed them to a specific batch of recently declassified documents where MJ-12 was mentioned. The memo that they found involved President Eisenhower and Nathan Twining and it mentioned MJ-12 in passing. This counts as independent verification from confirmed declassified documents that something like MJ-12 existed. But again, someone was directing them in their research into these matters in a way that is straight out of a Hollywood psychological thriller.

These facts, along with many other data points, have led many researchers to conclude that the MJ-12 documents are at the very least a controlled release of information to the public, where true information is mixed with disinformation or with misinformation in order to create an atmosphere of plausible deniability around the subject. After all, in our opening clip from the Roswell movie, the Majestic 12 group is depicted as deciding to control the way information is released by mixing true information with disinformation or by releasing accurate information through less than reputable sources.

This appears to be the MO of how information has been leaked from inside the intelligence community, and how the subject of UFOs has been managed in the public consciousness by the intelligence community. And the truth of the phenomenon may be much stranger than the typical idea of little green men flying around in metallic spacecraft that the general public has been led to believe.

For example, another document which corroborates the MJ-12 documents is the Wilbert Smith memorandum released by the Canadian government. Now, Wilbert Smith was a reputable scientist who worked with the Canadian government in their investigation into the UFOs in the decades immediately after World War II. In his memo, he states the following facts that he uncovered in communicating with the Americans about their research into the subject. He writes, quote,

Remember he's mentioned in the MJ-12 documents. In other words, according to Smith, there was a highly secretive group and it was indeed led by Dr. Vannevar Bush, as the MJ-12 documents allege. But curiously, he adds at the end that investigating the phenomenon was being pursued in relation to, quote, mental phenomena, or it was being pursued in relationship to consciousness studies, a subject that we will examine in our next two episodes. So this is the first hint that we get in a credible government document that the US government is aware of the fact that not only does the UFO phenomenon exist, but that the UFO phenomenon is tied into the occult or into mental phenomenon or into consciousness studies.

So there does appear to be much circumstantial evidence to support the idea that there does exist a secretive government group like the MJ-12 group, and that it is indeed studying this subject and that it has indeed simultaneously covered up the subject while also controlling the release of the information related to the subject. And indeed, some of the more credible voices in the modern UFO discussion lend credence to this idea. In an interview with James Ian Doley, Luis Elizondo alluded to the existence of a group like MJ-12. This is significant because Mr. Elizondo is considered to be a highly credible voice by the mainstream media and by members of Congress, since he has verifiably been the head of the Pentagon's investigation into UFOs in the recent past.

I know it's been brought up, MJ-12. If that was such a thing, I don't understand if it's an official body or something that would be rogue. Or both.

Or both. Interesting.

And again, there's a group that has been brought up called Zodiac. I can't comment on that.

Now, Elizondo's answer is interesting because I can't comment on that. It's often an admission by Mr. Elizondo that the subject at hand, if he were to speak on it, would violate his security oath and his nondisclosure agreements that he has with the U.S. government. And so this seems to be an admission by Elizondo that there is something to this idea of a secretive government group studying the subject and controlling how this subject is perceived in the mainstream discourse.

Even members of Congress who have been briefed on this subject seem to see some level of credibility to these claims. In the May 2022 UAP hearings held by the Congressional Subcommittee on Intelligence, Republican Congressman Mike Gallagher had a document, which is known as the Wilson Davis memo, officially added to the Congressional record.

And then finally, are you aware of a document that appeared around 2019, sometimes called the Admiral Wilson memo or E.W. Notes memo?

I am. I am not. I'm not personally aware of that.

OK. This is a document in which, again, I'm not commenting on the veracity. I was hoping you would help me with that. In which the former head of DIA claims to have had a conversation with the doctor, Eric Wilson, and claims to have sort of been made aware of certain contractors or DOD programs that he tried to get fuller access to and was denied access to.

So you're not aware of that?

I'm not aware of Congress. In my 10 seconds remaining, then I guess I just would ask Mr. Chairman unanimous consent to enter that memo.

Without objection.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate it.

This is highly significant because the main subject of the memo that Gallagher mentioned is a shadowy high level group that is back engineering UFO technology, a group that sounds something like the Majestic 12. And while there is much evidence to support the authenticity of the Wilson Davis memo, enough to get members of Congress to stick their necks out about it, as you just heard. Yet the memo is still doubted by many. Again, the memo itself, which came from astronaut Edgar Mitchell's estate, conforms to this pattern of leaking the truth out and yet leaking the truth out in a way that can still be plausibly denied. It seems to be credible, but not credible enough to where you can take it to the bank.

In fact, researchers and academics like Dr. Diana Pasulka, Robbie Graham, and Grant Cameron have all pointed out that the government and the intelligence community has managed the UFO story in the mainstream media and in the public consciousness through this very methodology. By leaking real information out to the public, which is also mixed with disinformation and misinformation, and by also taking real events and real stories and sensationalizing them through Hollywood movies. As Robbie Graham documents in his book Silver Screen Saucers, both Hollywood and the intelligence community have sought to promote belief in UFOs in the public mind, and they have sought to push the idea that if UFOs are indeed real that they must be alien spacecraft.

And yet, as we have seen and as we will continue to see, those who study the phenomenon in the realm of government and in the realm of academia are adamant that it isn't so simple.

But so why would the government do this? What is their angle here? Why would they put out shady documents that seem to be credible, but not quite credible enough? Why put out real information in the form of fiction, and why sensationalize stories of UFOs through Hollywood movies so that the subject is made out to seem silly and horribly one-dimensional?

Well, a few reasons have been suggested as to why this is done. The first being that it allows the government to leak true information out to the public in order to acclimatize us to the subject, yet in a way that will only ever be taken with a grain of salt. This allows the government and the intelligence community to be able to squash or to downplay the subject for various reasons if let's say they don't like the public's reaction to the information that they've received, because they can always draw attention to all the disinformation and to all the misinformation that they've sewn into the UFO community.

Think of the government like Morpheus from The Matrix. The government has been handing out red pills and blue pills related to the UFO subject so that if you want to walk away from the subject, you can find good reason to. And likewise, if you want to look deeper, you will find plenty of reasons to take the subject seriously and to jump down the rabbit hole.

So this method of mixing true information with disinformation, this method of mixing fact with fiction, allows the government to get the discussion going while also making room for off-ramps, both for the government and for the general public should they choose to take them.

So also by mixing truth with fiction and by mixing real information with disinformation, those researchers who function as middlemen, like Bill Moore and like Tom DeLonge, they are put in a position where they are not in control because they can't take everything that they are fed at face value. They have to put the puzzle pieces together. In fact, Bill Moore later recounted that one of his sources in the 1980s told him that they would pass along true information mixed with disinformation and that it was up to him to decipher between the two, but that he was a smart man and would figure it out. This debilitates researchers who have intelligence community connections because if they don't have all the puzzle pieces up front, or if they have fake puzzle pieces, so to speak, then they can't assemble the full picture to determine what UFOs actually are. So also, when you know that what you have is partly false, it's like mentally trying to fit the wrong pieces together in a jigsaw puzzle. In other words, it sends you off looking for the right pieces that fit. It sends you off looking for the other part of the story that is true that will make sense of everything that you've been presented with. This keeps the researchers and the middlemen continually going back to their sources from within the government and from within the intelligence community so that maybe they can get the rest of the picture and finally figure out what's going on with this subject.

And there's another word for this. It's called mind control. You see, the longer our innate desire for understanding a subject is delayed, the more desperate we become to find out some answers, any answers that will satisfy our curiosity. Especially if what we are learning about could completely change our picture of reality, as is the case with UFOs, so we will become more and more desperate to find out what the real truth really is. And so out of this drive for intellectual closure, we become psychologically susceptible to accept more and more outlandish ideas and theories in order to satisfy our curiosity. In other words, your mind becomes sort of like silly putty in the hands of those who are feeding you information. And with this subject going mainstream, this is a psychological effect that is sure to affect many in mainstream culture.

Think of the QAnon movement, for instance, which uses puzzles and leaked information to string people along. A similar thing can easily happen with this subject. The public will become more and more susceptible to cultish beliefs, as their desire for intellectual closure surrounding this subject is continuously delayed by a government that acknowledges the phenomenon, but which also continues to withhold the bigger picture from the general public.

And this is where we need to have our guard up surrounding this subject. You see, as Christians, we need to remember that we are specifically warned not to become wrapped up in conspiracy theories or in the pursuit of secret knowledge. As the prophet Isaiah said to the people of Israel in Isaiah chapter 8 and verse 12, do not say a conspiracy concerning all that this people call a conspiracy, nor be afraid of their threats, nor be troubled. And as Isaiah goes on to warn later in the chapter, a danger of the conspiracy mindset is that we will always become wrapped up with the occult or with the pursuit of secret knowledge as we are trying to uncover what's really going on in the world.

Now, almost everyone in Western culture at this point is a conspiracy theorist of some sort. We all do recognize that there are powerful cabals of men at various levels of cultural influence. But you see, you can quickly and easily become so wrapped up with these ideas that you take your eyes off of Christ and become ironically obsessed with the very evil that you are seeking to expose. I know that in my own testimony before I became a Christian, I joined the Freemasons. Why did I join the Freemasons? Because I was obsessed with conspiracy theories. And so I wanted to join Freemasonry so that I could climb the ladder and find out the real truth about how the world works. And indeed, groups like the Majestic Twelve, if they do indeed exist, and those who are involved with this subject from within the government, do function sort of like secret societies and like mystery religions. They have their own rights of initiation called security clearances. They have various levels of initiation known as security briefings. And they possess hidden knowledge.

So we can begin to think that maybe they have access to some information that we need to know so that we then open ourselves up to being strung along by them through psychological and spiritual manipulation. This requires the Christian to be cautious in dealing with this subject because we don't want to become lured from the simplicity that's found in Christ. You see, as the Apostle Paul says, in Christ are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And in His Word, we have a full-orbed worldview that is sufficient not only for our faith, but that is sufficient also for our understanding of the world around us. And so we don't need to go searching for hidden knowledge. We don't need to be strung along by leaks from the government and from shady intelligence sources as interesting as this subject may be. Because you see, we already have a comprehensive picture of reality in Christ and in His Word.

And so while yes, there is truth to this subject that we should not shy away from, yet everything about it will fit within a Christian theistic framework, just as all things do. And so we won't gain anything from this subject that we don't already have in Christ. As Abraham Kuyper said, there is not a square inch and the whole domain of our human existence over which Christ, who is sovereign overall, does not cry out, mine. And that includes everything in outer space, and it includes everything in the spiritual realm as well. We have all that we need in Jesus Christ.

And as we examined in the last episode, it was the secular worldview that cannot account for the supernatural or for the preternatural. It's the secular worldview that led to all the secrecy surrounding this subject in the first place. In many ways, the cover-up has been an attempt by a secular government to manage magic. Indeed, if Cotton Mather or Increase Mather were confronted with this phenomenon, which they apparently were if you read their writings, they would simply see it as a part of the wonders of the invisible world. They would maybe speculate about it a bit from a biblical framework, but then they would move on with their lives.

You see, Christianity allows one to account for these things without becoming wrapped up with these things or obsessed with them. And as we will see, many researchers and academics in the 1970s would be brought in by the government to examine this subject, and many of them would come to striking conclusions about the phenomenon. Conclusions that will bring us right back to where we began in considering John Dee and the invisible college. Conclusions that do indeed fit right in with a biblical or a spiritual interpretation of what this phenomenon is all about. And we will consider that in our next episode on the invisible college.

# OUTRO

Oh my God! Wow! It's bright!