# LHCP Sunday Morning Sermon - 11 MAY 2025 "Living Hope"

Good morning. Let's turn our attention again today to First Peter. This is a letter written by Peter the Apostle, the messenger of Christ, and it's a message he brings from Jesus. It comes with Jesus' authority, and it's a message he brings of Jesus. It's a message concerning Christ. And so, Jesus is at the center. And we saw last week that Peter's writing to what he calls the elect exiles chosen by God, secure in Him, not of this world, even as they live in the world. He's writing to Christians, and he begins his letter: May grace and peace be multiplied to you.

Today, I'd like us to begin to look at the main body of this letter. One of the things that's striking about not only Peter's letters, but Paul's as well, is just how thick and meaty and full they are. Each sentence is jam-packed with thoughts that invite reflection and conversation. It's unique in that way. I've tried to write letters on occasion, and I can't imagine anyone ever poring over them again and again to sort of study the words that are there. And yet, the Scripture has this way because it is God's Word that just drives us there. We want to look at it again. It invites reflection. You have to slow down. You might read the whole letter initially, and now you want to come back and pore over it.

So, as we slow down and pore over this letter together, we're going to come across the word this morning. And that word is hope. It's such a rich word. The Bible mentions hope quite a bit. It's part of Apostle Paul's big three, right? Like faith, hope, and love. So, it's one of the big ones. In the Scriptures, hope refers to a trust, a confident expectation, and assurance. That's grounded in God's past actions and looks at His future promises. And hope is at the center of this morning's text. And so, we'll consider it: the nature of hope, and then the author of hope, and then the possession of hope.

So, hear the word of the Lord this morning from 1 Peter, verse 3: Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. According to His great mercy, He has caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. This is the word of the Lord this morning. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has caused us to be born again to a living hope. It's such a great phrase. People ought to name their congregations after this phrase. It's a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Peter says something about hope here, that it is a living hope. What do we know from the Bible about a living hope? Well, the first thing is that a living hope is something which is necessary in a sinful world. Jesus looked out over the crowds, and He would see people who were, as the Scripture says, Matthew reminded us, harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd. That's how He looked out, and He saw the world. He wasn't impressed with how great everybody was getting along. He looked out, and He saw that they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.

Paul reminds the church at Ephesus that before they came to Christ, they had no hope, and they were without God in the world. It's a pretty horrible position to be in: no hope and without God in the world. Peter puts hope right here at the beginning of the letter because he knows that people need it. Today, we live in a world without real hope. It is a world that is anxious. It's a world that is depressed and increasingly godless, searching, dark, harassed, helpless. It's a world of sin. It's a world that, as it always has, it's a world in rebellion against God in the individual and in the culture at large. It's a difficult world we live in. We sin, and we're sinned against. Hope is something which is desperately needed in that situation.

Living hope is necessary in a sinful world. And a living hope is then a blessing in that sinful world. If we lived in a land of bliss where there was no sin and no sorrow and no death, well, there would be no need of any hope. If there's no sin, no sorrow, no death, no hope is needed. So, it is true that when we go to be with the Lord at the end of our days as Christians, hope will no longer be needed. There, Christ will be. We'll see Him face to face.

Hope is needed because of trouble, because of suffering in this world. And so, we can never disconnect those two things. Hope and suffering are intimately connected. Paul even writes to the church in Rome that suffering leads a person to endurance, and endurance to character. And that character leads to hope. The only way to get to hope is through suffering. The only way a Christian can rejoice in his or her suffering is if they have a living hope. Hope exists because of suffering. They're just connected.

In this world, we experience trouble. Some of you are here this morning, and you are in the midst of some fairly deep troubles. There is suffering. And for the Christian, one of the fruits of that suffering is that our hope that God gives us becomes more and more alive. For those who have a less trouble-filled life, and maybe there are some of you who are here today who are like that, there's a great danger in that, and in our culture, in our place, I think this is really kind of a pretty big danger. And that is that we can just kind of become complacent in life. Hope seems unnecessary when I have a lot of things that I can enjoy, when things are going well. Why do I need hope if I just got a raise? Why do I need hope if I'm going on vacation next week to the beach? Those kinds of things. We can become complacent.

People can think life will always be sort of smooth, assuming foolishly that all will always be as it is today. When things are going well, it makes us complacent. We don't generally realize how much trouble we're in as people, how close death is, how soon it will be before we will face the Judge of all men and give an account for the life that He's given us. Hope, that is the fruit of suffering and difficulty, is a blessing, is good because it keeps us looking at God and away from the things of this world. It keeps us from being complacent. Suffering is a good in that way. It brings hope. It brings hope to the front. It keeps us looking at God.

So, a living hope is a blessing in a sinful world. And then, a living hope is what Peter calls it: living. Peter writes of a living hope, the hope we have as Christians. I was talking to someone last week, and I love these kinds of conversations, one, because then I know that you all have these kinds of conversations, but also because I love mathematics. And he was commenting on how the question was: Is our growth as Christians, is our sanctification, is it linear or exponential? And so, I've been thinking about that actually all week. And I realized that we're talking about something here, a living hope. And here is the picture of that, that I think that the hope that we have as Christians is something that grows exponentially as we grow.

It is a hope that shows itself in a heightened expectation as we get older and more mature as Christians. We have a heightened expectation that God really is at work in this or that situation. That there's a growing sense of confidence and gratitude, of hope in God. It's a hope that looks forward to being fulfilled and grows in its confidence that one day it will be fulfilled. And so, Peter can say this hope is something which is living. It's growing, it's not stagnant in any way, it's alive. It's something we have now in the present. But it looks forward, looks beyond the grave.

As Christians, it's also anchored in the past. There's solid reason, solid ground for one to have the hope that the Bible speaks of. This living hope, this is what makes real hope more than a wish. It's anchored, it's based on something solid. We aren't just hoping that everything will turn out okay in the end, hoping tomorrow will be a better day, hoping everyone will be in heaven. We have a living hope.

Living hope is not just a flat intellectual hope. In other words, a hope like that would just be a hope that some knowledge you know about, some facts that can be stated. Just saying, for example, yes, I am a Christian, I know that when I die, I will be in heaven, is a real yawner. That's not alive. True, but it's just a mere fact. For the Christian, hope is not something which just is able to state facts. That's why Peter says it's living hope, something very real. It's a real internal confidence and assurance that knows all those facts. It moves us, helps us.

And a living hope is also not a dead hope or a worldly hope. The world is full of dead hopes, kind of a sort of, like, full of playful optimism, you know, wishful thinking in everything. When you wish upon a star, like, I mean, everything has, I don't know, you know, when you blow out the candles on a birthday cake, when are you supposed to do, make a wish? When you look at a star, make a wish. When you throw a coin into a pool, make a wish. This is like the best we come up with: wishful thinking.

Rather than, if you're so stuck in this life, any realization of those hopes that we might wish for when we blow out a candle, any of those kinds of wishes that people have, they're just stuck here in the now. Even if they're realized, they're short-lived, they can't pass the grave. Rather than forgiveness of sin and eternal life, a living hope that looks beyond the grave, that everything looks towards things in this world to have holes in our lives filled.

Maybe, for example, a person might hope to be loved or hope to get some recognition. And in order to possess these things, like being loved or some recognition, they might do some stuff to try to achieve those hopes. They might get married, they might make friends, they might take on a new job. They might follow a prescribed eating or medicinal or exercise regimen. They might even try to find some way to get religious or spiritual or so on.

Of course, none of those things is bad in and of itself. Some of them are quite good. But as the object of one's hope, they are very misplaced. They're dead hopes, they're worldly hopes. The spouses are sinners, and they fail. Marriages are strained. Friends can neglect you, not talk to you for a while, they can betray you. Coworkers and employers can recognize your hard lifelong work at the end with a certificate that says thank you.

A religion that sees Jesus as a fix to one's problems will soon find that Jesus isn't really here for that, and at least not in the way that people think about it. And age, of course, catches up even to the greatest of athletes or the healthiest of people. Worldly hopes, dead hopes, wishful thinking about a happier life, bright optimism—it's all so short-sighted, it just will lead to disappointment. True living hope must look past the grave, must look past death.

It's why the Apostle Paul is very clear, and he reminds us of something that we should have drilled into our brains: that if in Christ we have hope in this life only, we are of most men to be pitied.

In a moment, we're going to consider how we come into possession of this living hope that Peter talks about. But it'd be good to look at who makes it possible to have a living hope in the first place. Who is the author? Because hope has to come from somewhere. Where does it come from?

Well, first, it might be good to think about, well, who, who's not the author of living hope? How can you not—who is not able to give you that? And first is us. Like, we personally are not the authors of a living hope. We are not able to, as people, give real life, living hope to other people, like dispense it freely. Why is that? Well, because we're weak, and because we're sinners, and because we don't hold the future of the universe in our hands, we can't promise much of anything to anyone. One, because we still, like, would need to be alive to fulfill that promise, and that's not on us. And two, we, you know, it's very possible that we'd be providentially hindered by some situation that occurs from even doing the things that we're promising people. We, we're not the authors of living hope, we're the recipients of it. But we can't be the ones who are relied upon to give hope to other people.

And, of course, a natural outworking of that is people who promise hope to you aren't the authors of it either. You live long enough, like, I mean, every four years at least, you hear some politician talking about hope for something they can't deliver. Politicians, counselors, experts in this or whatever thing cannot produce a living hope for you.

Circumstances can—circumstances guarantee you nothing. Your circumstances are a guarantee of absolutely nothing. In life, everything can change in a moment. Circumstances just are. They're things. The changing of one's circumstances does not produce a living hope. Many have become misdirected here. They've placed their hope fully on change. If I can have a new spouse, if I can have a new job, if I can have a new approach to life that'll fix everything, then I'll have life. But changed circumstances, they're not the authors of living hope. They're just changed circumstances.

So, who is the author? Well, Peter is praising here. He says, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our Father in heaven. He's the author. If you want to know who has plenty of living hope to give, who can guarantee it, who can dispense it, who can give it? It's your Father in heaven.

Peter reminds us that it is according to His great mercy that we have a living hope, just as it was according to His foreknowledge that He's called us to be Christians. It's because of His great mercy that we have hope at all. Because without His mercy, there is no hope. Because without sin's removal, there is no hope. We'd just be dead in our sins under the wrath of God, or Paul: we would be without God and without hope in the world.

But God's mercy has changed everything. Our God says, I will be merciful toward their iniquities, and I will remember their sins no more. Because of God's mercy, our sins are not held against us. Death and hell are defeated. Eternal life is given. God's mercy means that our suffering is for our growth. So, rather than our sufferings indicating that we're without hope and something is wrong with us and we're doing something wrong, suffering is what points us to hope because of the mercy of God.

Our hope, then, is a living hope. This living hope is not a hope in a fix. It's not a hope in a change. It's not a hope in another person. Our hope is in God. Listen to the words of Scripture. Look, here's Jeremiah. This is Jeremiah, okay, so you think you got troubles. Okay, so Jeremiah is standing, and he's watching as everything he knows is being upended. The city, the center of worship, has been overtaken by a foreign invading army, and they've just destroyed it and burned it to the ground. His friends, many of them slaughtered, others captured. So, it's not a good day or week or month.

And this is what he says. He's crying out to God, he says, Remember my affliction, like, and all my wanderings and the wormwood and the gall, all the horrors that I am walking through as a person. And then, listen, this, he says, because my soul continually remembers it, like, I'm always dealing with this, Lord. It's always on my mind, and my soul is bowed down within me. Who's he going to trust in? Change in circumstances? The horrific Babylonians who are oppressing him all of a sudden becoming nice? No. Some king? Oh, no, wait, the king is now captive. Some friend of his, powerless friend?

This is what he does. He says, But this I call to mind, and therefore I have hope. And then, you know this because we've pulled this out of context so many times, put on nice placards: The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases. His mercies never come to an end. They're new every morning. Great is Your faithfulness. Then the part that doesn't make the placard: The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will hope in Him.

The mind, the heart, the soul burdened under great difficulty. And I know some of you suffer great, great difficulty. Here is a prayer for you. Jeremiah is under great weight of difficulty, and he calls something to mind. And that's what gives him hope: that God's character, no matter what the circumstances are, never changes. His steadfast love never ceases. His mercy, it's never coming to an end. Every morning, new acts of faithfulness will be expressed towards His people.

David knew it, too. He said, Surely all mankind is just a mere breath. We're going about as a shadow. And he says, Surely for nothing, everybody's like working themselves up. He uses, they are in a turmoil, but that's what he means. Everybody's just working themselves up, acquiring things, because tomorrow might be your last day. So, they're acquiring this. And he says, Man heaps up wealth, and he doesn't even know who will gather. Like, we're just all a breath, we're all a mist, and yet there's so much wealth acquisition because everybody's trying to get as much as they can before they go.

And now, O Lord, what am I going to wait for? David says, My hope is in You. Another place, he talks about being cast down: Why are you cast down, O my soul? Why are you in turmoil within me? Hope in God. I will again praise Him, my God and my salvation.

A living hope is only a possibility because our=\* our God is a merciful God. He cares about us. He was willing to send His Son. He's a God who doesn't change. His faithfulness is forever. His steadfast love never ceases. Our God is the author.

So, then, how do we possess it since we didn't create it? Since we're not the authors of it, we can only possess it. We can only possess the hope that we need if it's given to us. And once again, we see Peter emphasizing in just a very brief sentence, the work of all the three persons of God, the Trinity—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—at work for our blessing and our benefit.

First, look at this. It says, the Father causes us. He has caused us to be born again. In other words, it's first and foremost His work, His mercy, His foreknowledge, His kindness, His love in sending His Son. He causes us to be born again. He leaves nothing to chance at all. He causes that in you.

I mean, we're good at doing this in a negative way, right? Because it's like the seemingly endless search to find others to blame for our problems. But one of the things that we do is the world's current approach, or at least a part of it, is to try to root all of our troubles back to our childhood experiences. The reason why everybody's having trouble is because of some fatal flaw in your parent. Well, I mean, regardless of, I mean, you know, so my parents caused me to be this way.

Well, regardless of what you think of all that, here is the Scripture this morning, and the Scripture is a far greater reflection for you because your Parent did cause you to do something. That's what Peter is saying. He's saying our Father caused us to be born again. Every good and perfect gift that you have received is because of Him. He caused you. He caused you to be blessed beyond blessing. He caused you to have to be somebody who has eternal life in their hands. He caused you to be somebody who knows joy, knows hope, knows life. He caused you to have brothers and sisters in Christ that encourage you and pray for you and love you. He caused all of it. So, blame Him. Blame Him for all the blessings that you've received in your life.

Second is by His Spirit that He causes us to be born again. Jesus talked about that in speaking of the Holy Spirit, He says, Don't marvel that I said to you, you must be born again. The wind blows where it wishes. You hear its sound, but you don't know where it comes from or where it goes. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit. It's the Spirit's work to breathe life into a person. It's the Spirit who applies to us the redemption purchased by Christ. It's in the Spirit's power that we're given new life, that we're made into new men and women that were blessed with new hearts. We have hope because we're new people. The work of the Spirit bringing us into life in Christ. Born again.

And third, we're born again to a living hope, Peter says, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. God the Father, by His Spirit, causes us to be born again by convincing us of something. And maybe some of us here this morning must be convinced of this again. He convinces us of the Gospel, the truth of the Gospel, the revelation of Jesus Christ, the redemption that we have in Him, the forgiveness of sin, and then we embrace this Gospel.

And at the center of the Gospel is the death and resurrection of Jesus. It is the resurrection that is the event that makes all hope possible. Thus, Paul's declaration to the Corinthians, essentially, that if Christ is not raised from the dead, we are without hope.

Peter, of course, because, remember, a man wrote this letter, Peter, of course, knows exactly what it feels like to be absolutely hopeless. Do you know that he denied Jesus three times? And that he knew that after that denial, his last words were this denial. And then Jesus is brutally crucified, and Peter is left with a thought: I will never be able to apologize for the worst act of my life. Peter is thinking about a life: Did I waste it in service of a dead Christ? Peter is confused, sad, hopeless.

And then, the resurrection. He's writing about what he knows. He's writing about what he experiences. He writes about what he wants all of us to know and grasp, that is, through the resurrection of Christ from the dead, that there is hope, as Paul writes to the Ephesians: But God, being rich in mercy, because of His great love with which He loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ. By grace, you've been saved. He raised us up with Him and seated us with Him in the heavenly places in Christ, so that we can sing: My hope is built on nothing less than Jesus' blood and righteousness. I dare not trust the sweetest frame, but I will wholly lean on Jesus' name.

What is the proper response to all of this, friends? What is the proper response to those who, in our discouragement and suffering and persecution for faith, in our difficulties and trials and being sinned against and being sinners, and yet, at the same time, here's God in His mercy in that state. He chooses to give us, cause us to be born again to a living hope. What is the response? What is the response?

The response is praise. Listen to Peter: Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. In Christ, you are born again as those who've repented of their sins and cried out to Jesus for forgiveness. By faith, you have a new family. You're a part of Christ's family. And this family is a family of hope. Not a family of wishful thinking, but a family of hope. A living hope in a living God who has taken those who were dead in their sins and given them new life, new hearts, eternal life, a future beyond the grave, and a present with a purpose to follow Jesus and to live for Him.

May we do just that. May we be people who praise God, who, according to His great mercy, has caused us, caused us to be born again to a living hope. How? Through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Let's pray.
