Good morning. The fourth commandment can be found in Exodus, chapter 20. This is what it says: Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days you shall labor and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it you shall do no work. You shall do no work, you or your son or your daughter, or your male servant or your female servant or your livestock or the sojourner who is within your gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that's in them, and He rested on the seventh day. Therefore, the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy.

Later on, the prophet Isaiah is engaging with the people, and they are struggling to follow after the Lord. The Lord says this through Isaiah: If you turn back your foot from the Sabbath, from doing your pleasure on My holy day, and you call the Sabbath a delight and the holy day of the Lord honorable, if you honor it not going your own ways or seeking your own pleasure or talking idly, then you shall take delight in the Lord, and I will make you ride on the heights of the earth. I will feed you with the heritage of Jacob your father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken.

The Sabbath day was one of the unique aspects, alongside circumcision, of being Jewish. Though the perspectives are very wide and varied among Christians today, it's still an important distinctive of what it means to be a Christian. Going to church is an instinct that Christians have. It's an understanding that Sunday is different than other days of the week, at least a day of rest, a day of worship. Those outside of the church don't place the same importance on the nature of Sunday that Christians do. By Jesus' day, much thought had been given to the Sabbath. It was very important; Isaiah had said so. It was one of the Ten Commandments, so of course it's important.

A lot of emphasis was on trying to define, well, what exactly is work? Because I can't do work on the Sabbath, but what is work? It seems that what might have started as an exercise of wanting to obey God's law, as it was described in the fourth commandment, had gotten quite out of hand. And Jesus, we'll see, because He refuses to play the game in this area, as He does in other areas, this will lead to some conflict. The Gospel of Matthew, as it progresses, begins to emphasize that there is a growing conflict developing between the religious leaders and Jesus. The two confrontations we're going to hear about today give us a picture of that conflict, and they occur on the Sabbath, as Jesus and His disciples are traveling to and then are present in the local synagogue, which was the Jewish place for worship, prayer, and reading of the Scriptures on the Sabbath day.

Hear the word of the Lord now from Matthew, chapter 12, beginning at verse 1: At that time, Jesus went through the grain fields on the Sabbath. His disciples were hungry, and they began to pluck heads of grain and to eat. But when the Pharisees saw it, they said to Him, "Look, your disciples are doing what is not lawful on the Sabbath." He said to them, "Have you not read what David did when he was hungry and those who were with him, how he entered the house of God and ate the bread of the presence, which was not lawful for him to eat nor for those who were with him, but only for the priests? Or have you not read in the law how on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and are guiltless? I tell you, something greater than the temple is here. And if you had known what this means, 'I desire mercy and not sacrifice,' you would not have condemned the guiltless. For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath."

He went on from there and entered their synagogue. A man was there with a withered hand, and they asked Him, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?" so that they might accuse Him. He said to them, "Which one of you who has a sheep, if it falls into a pit on the Sabbath, will not take hold of it and lift it out? Of how much more value is a man than a sheep? So it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath." Then He said to the man, "Stretch out your hand." And the man stretched it out, and it was restored, healthy like the other. But the Pharisees went out and conspired against Him, how to destroy Him.

This is the word of the Lord this morning. I would imagine if I asked you what the phrase "25% off" meant, that most of you in this room would probably think that you knew. I received a 25% off coupon from Pet Supplies Plus right there in Aberdeen, and I thought, "25% off, I understand what that means. That's very clear." But not really. You see, the following statement was included: "One time use only. Not valid on auto-ship or pharmacy orders. Pet Supply Plus rewards members only. May only be redeemed at participating Pet Supplies Plus locations. One coupon per household. May not be combined under any circumstances with any other offer. Restrictions may apply." That means they might not apply. "No cash value. No cash back. Excludes gift cards, dirty dog discount cards, and prior purchases. Valid only for in-stock items. Void if altered in any way, reproduced, transferred, or where prohibited by law. Offer may be revoked at any time. Discount percentages will be deducted after all other eligible discounts are applied but before sales tax. Customer is responsible for applicable taxes. Valid only for the intended recipient. Maximum savings $30 per coupon. Discount percentages may not be applied on orders placed using DoorDash." 25% off.

Now, when the Bible says that you do no work on the Sabbath, you might think that you understand what that means. Maybe the people thought they knew what it meant. There are the disciples. Jesus and His disciples are walking along, and they are hungry, so they're plucking grain heads, eating them from the field. It was perfectly acceptable to glean from the edges of fields. It wasn't thieving in any way. That was certainly not the complaint of the Pharisees. The Pharisees were complaining that the disciples were breaking the Sabbath rules. They were doing one of the 39 kinds of work, which the Jewish law as contained in the Mishnah, which you can read, regulated community life. These 39 different forms of work were forbidden on the Sabbath. Nothing was to be left to chance or to the thought of the individual. God was not to be disobeyed, so every detail, every circumstance should be considered. 25% off needs to be fully explained. And the Pharisees complained that Jesus' disciples were doing what was not lawful to do. The disciples were working. It wasn't that they were eating. It was that they were working because in order to get to the grain, they would have to get the husk off by rubbing it in their hands. Technically, that was seen as reaping and threshing on the Sabbath. They were working. They shouldn't work. So they call them out. They say, "They're doing what's not lawful on the Sabbath, Jesus, your disciples." And Jesus responds. He says, "Haven't you read that when David was hungry and those who were with him, he entered the house of God and ate the bread of the presence?" That phrase, the bread of the presence, or the showbread, was 12 loaves of unleavened bread that they would keep in the tabernacle or in the temple and set out before that. It symbolized God's presence with them and His provision and His abundance that He would give to His people. And so they would bake this bread on the Sabbath day or before the Sabbath day. It would be set out on the Sabbath. And then the old bread, because it was unleavened, it was still okay. It would be eaten by the priests. But they were the only ones, according to the law, that were allowed to eat it by Jewish law. King David came in with those who were with him, and he was hungry, as were they, and they ate of this bread and they were not condemned. Why? Well, because it was King David. He was the anointed one. He was able to come in and do that without condemnation because of who he was. Jesus is making a not so subtle claim. He's saying, if David and his followers can do it, then the one who is greater than King David and his followers can do it too. And then he makes a second claim of authority. He says, the priests who work in the temple on the Sabbath technically regularly profane the Sabbath. You know, it's the pastor joke, right? Great job because you only have to work one day a week doing this. That's what he's saying. He's saying, obviously, the priests are working on the Sabbath day. They have to. And so by doing that, they're profaning the Sabbath every single week. And yet they can come into the temple and do that, but they're not condemned. They're held guiltless. Why? Well, it's because of where all the service was occurring. It was the temple. That was the greater consideration. The claim Jesus then makes is that since He and those with Him are greater than the temple, something greater than the temple is here. He says, if the authority of the temple law trumps Sabbath rules, the priests are allowed to work if they're in the temple, then if I'm greater than the temple, what I say trumps the Sabbath rules. And then He goes on to say something which I can guarantee you had never been heard or said before by anyone. He says

, "I am the Lord of the Sabbath." He defines the rules. You really should take the exercise of looking at this Jewish text, the Mishnah, that concerns the Sabbath. You can look at it. It's an extensive tome. Jesus says, "Nope, I make the rules. I understand the heart of the law. I understand why the Sabbath exists. I understand what the Sabbath is about." In claiming this authority, Jesus is saying that if a person wants to know what proper worship looks like, what a proper understanding of Sabbath keeping or law keeping looks like, there is one source to understand, and that's to look at Christ, not the rules. Look at Christ. He is the Lord of the Sabbath, He says. 

In saying these things, which, like I said, in that day, hundreds of years of thought and commentating, Jesus is brushing aside. So in doing this, He's also saying something to the Pharisees. They're the religious leaders. They're the people that everybody looked to to know, well, what are the rules? How is it that you be a good Jew? How can we be good as people of God? How can we please God? They look to the Pharisees. If we're Christians, we've read the Bible, and the Pharisees in some ways are sometimes seen as the bad guys. But in the day, they're the good guys. They're the religious people who the folk would look to to teach them, show them the way to live faithfully. So these guys, these Pharisees who have encountered Jesus here and have started this little conflict, He's saying something to them. He's saying, you're wrong. He calls them out. He calls them to the overarching principle when a person is seeking to obey God in any area of life, including the Sabbath. He says, read it and understand it. I desire mercy and not sacrifice. Jesus does whenever He speaks about anything and any aspect of the law, He drives right to the heart. Jesus is not saying that the Sabbath doesn't matter or that all of a sudden the fourth commandment is out. He's getting at what's behind it, what supports it, what upholds it, why it even exists. He's claiming that He has the authority to declare how it is. And what He is saying is that behind the fourth commandment in terms of how we treat others is mercy. That is the guiding principle. How do we get there? Well, it's God's kindness. It's God's compassion. It's God's pity towards people. It's God's mercy that is what is behind the commandment in the first place. In a world of sin, in a world of a rat race, of endless activity, of continuous striving to accomplish, to make things, God has given you a gift. A day of rest, a day of gladness, a day of delight, a day of worship. It's a gift. How many of us don't like to sleep? He's saying, stop. I'm blessing you in that way. I'm giving you a day that you can rest. Mercy. And the fourth commandment, what He does is then He calls us to have that same heart towards other people. There's a call not just for a person to rest. You know, I'm supposed to rest on the Sabbath or something. But to allow those who are under their authority to do the same thing. They're not yours really, Jesus says. Your spouse, your children, your servants, your animals, they're the Lord's. It's merciful to stop striving and asking others to strive for you. It's merciful to rest from all that and to take the time to consider the goodness of God. Because everything that everybody strives after, God gave it to them anyway. Everything is in His hands. The fact that you're here today is in His hands. He's the one who gave you breath. He's the one who gave you life. And He's showing you mercy by giving you a day where you don't have to strive. What a gift.

And here are the disciples. What are they doing? They're picking some grain from the side of a field and having a snack. It's like Jesus is saying to them, to the Pharisees, really? Jesus had just spoken in the passage before about His yoke being easy and His burden light. How different that was from the unmerciful yoke of the Pharisees. So in this brief interaction, very brief, Jesus has claimed a couple of things. One, Jesus has claimed that He is the Lord of the Sabbath. And Jesus has claimed that He is greater than the temple. And Jesus has claimed that He is greater than the greatest king in Israel's history, King David. He's done this in about three sentences. And with that authority that He is taking upon Himself and saying that He has, He is declaring to us today and to them at the time that mercy is why the Lord gave the commandment. And so why we are worshiping and even able to rest today here together is because of the mercy of God. That's what drove us here. The mercy to call us to Christ and then the mercy of God that would have us come and just rest and worship together. Mercy should drive how we treat anyone this day.

Jesus says these things, and then He and His disciples travel along and they finally make it to the synagogue where they're going to go and read and pray, worship. When they arrive, they come into the synagogue. There is a man there who is not right. He has this withered hand. Something is wrong with one of his hands. He can't function correctly. And Jesus takes the action. Well, first the Pharisees ask a question. They ask Him. They say, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?" See? Is it lawful? Is it according to the rules? This was the rule. It's void where prohibited. This is the rule. The rule was that, it still is the rule by the way, unless it's life-threatening, it can wait until the next day. Why heal a guy with a withered hand for them on Saturday when you can do it on Sunday? If it's not life-threatening, why do it at all? It should wait. That's what they thought. Jesus, of course, heals the man. He says, "You care enough about sheep. If you had a sheep and it was in a pit, you would pull it out. It wouldn't have to be almost dead. You would take care of it." And then He says, "Aren't men worth more than sheep?" Those are the merciful words of Jesus. Mercy triumphs. Mercy is more important than sacrifice. People are important to Him. People matter. You matter. He cares. It was that way with you. Maybe some of you this morning here have been thinking, and especially if you're relatively new or a new Christian, it can sound very much like an internal discussion. I thought about that as I was preparing. All this talk about Sabbaths and old Jewish kings and the bread of the presence and temples and all of that, it can sound very kind of bizarre and a little bit maybe irrelevant. What does that have to do with me? I want to tell you this morning that it has everything to do with you. Because Jesus, the Jesus that we're reading about here, He would eventually die on the cross and then He would rise again from the dead. And now He rules and reigns from heaven. The Scripture says that He's coming again, and He's the judge of all men. We'll have to deal with this Jesus. There's no escaping that fact. So it's good to know what He's like.

I want to stop and say the Bible's claim is that we are kind of like the sheep here in this story, that we're dead in our sins. We don't do what we should do. We do things that we shouldn't do. And the Bible says that because of that we deserve death and without someone pulling us out of the pit, we're without hope. And I guess I would just want you to know that Jesus' words here are important because they remind us that Jesus would pull you out of the pit. They are a reminder that He will do what He did with this man who had the withered hand, that He will rescue you, that He will save you. Every Christian at some point, possibly on a Sunday, heard the good news of the Gospel and was pulled out of a pit that they could not rescue themselves out of. They were dead in their sin and were given life by Jesus and then their broken heart was healed. The life that was withering on the vine was restored. That's what Jesus does because Jesus says people are important. He'll pull you out of the pit. He'll save your soul. He'll give you life. He says it's lawful to do good on the Sabbath. So there's always a call to come to Christ. I hope that everyone in this room knows Him. And if you don't, I hope you hear that He thinks that you're important. Don't leave today without talking to somebody who knows Jesus and ask what His call on you is, how you can come to faith, how you can follow Him. It's not an internal discussion in that way. You've got to know the person of Jesus who rules over all things. The person of Jesus who rules over all things says people are important and it's good to do good.

Now having said that, I want to have an internal discussion. It's going to seem like that because for some of us, maybe many, probably not everybody, there has been a lot of hand-wringing and a lot of conflict and a lot of guilt related to keeping the Sabbath. And since I think this in the Gospel of Matthew is the only time that we're going to have a picture of an interaction with Jesus on the Sabbath and on the rule-keeping and all, I just wanted to say a couple of things. In desiring to follow Jesus well, we rightly want to follow His commandments. We want to follow His commandments. And that includes keeping the Sabbath

 holy. And I think if you're like me, even if you don't have the same heart that the Pharisees displayed and we're about to find out their heart, it's not good. The same heart towards it that the Pharisees displayed. Eventually, your questions about the Sabbath end up sounding a lot like Pharisee questions. Is it permissible for me to do this or that thing? Is it permissible for me to watch the Ravens game on a Sunday? Is it permissible for me to have my kids play in rec sports leagues on a Sunday? Is it permissible for me to go out to eat on a Sunday? And these kinds of questions. And Christians may argue about these things or we might not be the arguing type. So what we do is we place this just kind of load on ourselves, on our shoulders. And sometimes the Sabbath becomes more of a chore than a delight. I hope it's not that way for you, but I'm sure that probably there are some of you who've walked through that kind of thing. And so you get to a point maybe where your chief end becomes less about glorifying God and enjoying Him and more about not messing up. And that's sad to me. Because it was sad for me. Because I've been in that place. And what I want you to know is that all of us who have been in those places can hear Jesus' words today and really hold on to them. And what He's saying is it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath. This is the better way. Brothers and sisters, without guilt, you can always do good on the Sabbath. What does that look like? Well, I don't know. I mean, there's people in your life. You can do something good for them. Like, this is Jesus. Jesus doesn't prepare for us the Mishnah. Jesus says things like, "Do good." That's the clarity you're going to receive. Do good. Have a heart that's merciful towards other people who are struggling with all kinds of things. And engage with them. Find ways to encourage and strengthen the brothers and sisters in Christ. Come and worship God together like we do. Come and worship Him. Worship Him in the morning. Worship Him in the evening. Show hospitality. Rest from your labors. And encourage those who are under your care to do the same thing. Your family, coworkers, those who are in the community. Look, the world is going to keep rushing around like madness. People will be treated like resources. And everything is always going to be about me, myself, and I, and getting something for me. Christians, it's always permissible to do good. It's always permissible to rest. It's always permissible to worship. It's always permissible to show mercy. The day has been given to you as a gift. May we receive it as such. Jesus heals this man and He makes His statement. The religious leaders of His day are very unhappy. They're really unhappy. The healed man and the others in the synagogue, they are very happy. Because Jesus healed on the Sabbath. He did good. They're all happy, but the religious leaders are unhappy. And this is what the text says. But the Pharisees went out and conspired against Him how to destroy Him. They did Sabbath plotting. This plotting nature was hinted at once they arrived at the synagogue. They were going to try to use the merciful nature of Jesus against Him. They knew Him well enough to know that they could put a person who was in need in front of Him. And they knew that Jesus couldn't do anything but help that person. They knew it. And so they waited for their opportunity to put the hurting person in front of Jesus so that they could accuse Him, the Bible says. They didn't see an opportunity to rejoice but to trap and to accuse. And the man with the withered hand, the suffering person, the difficult person, he was just a tool. A tool to be used. Jesus says people are not tools to be used. Jesus says people are important. Jesus looks at a person like you, like me, who has all kinds of issues, and He's merciful. The Pharisees, the religious leaders, the world, it looks at people and it says, how can I use them to get what I want? How is this person of use to me to accomplish what I want in this world? People become tools. People are used. And that's what we see here. In these episodes, the religious leaders are exposed for what they are. The Pharisees, respected by the people, held up by the people, loved by the people as the ones who really got it together and were closest to God. The religious leaders called upon by the Scriptures to be examples to the flock. They spoke a lot about the Sabbath and what was required, and they looked the part and they laid the heavy yoke on the people, but it was a yoke they could appear to be carrying quite well so everybody thought they had it all together. So that people would listen to them, but in this passage, we see what they would end up doing on the Sabbath. In a sad and great irony, we find them plotting and conspiring to destroy Jesus. The words they spoke may have sounded to those around them like rational questions, but their hearts were bent on destruction. Why? Why? Did they really care about the disciples and the grain? No. Did they really care that a guy got healed or not? He'd been there every week. If he got healed, fine, that's good, that's good. If not, fine, it's always been that way. No. They hated Jesus because of His claims to authority. Because that represented a serious threat to their authority. If Jesus is Lord of the Sabbath, what are they when it comes to talking about the Sabbath, which they really like to do? Jesus had put them in their place and they hated Him for it. They hated Him on the Sabbath. He didn't do what they wanted. He didn't follow the rules they did like they wanted Him to. Their unmerciful heart and their pride was exposed. They cared more about the Sabbath rules that kept them in authority and kept them looking better than everybody else, than the people for whom the Sabbath was given. They cared more about the Sabbath rules that kept them in authority than the Lord of the Sabbath who is the one who truly makes the rules. It is Him they should have looked up to.

Brothers and sisters, ultimately, this little section of Matthew isn't primarily about the Sabbath, it's about Jesus. And who He is and His authority over everything. If He is the Lord of the Sabbath, of basically the structures of all the universe, of work and rest, if He's Lord of all that, then He certainly has something to say to you and to your life. So the choices are kind of laid out here. Will you listen to Him? Or will you plot, find a way to avoid the things that He is saying? He calls you to come to Him today. Will you come to Him? Brothers and sisters in Christ, on this Christian Sabbath day, may we then look up to the Lord of the Sabbath, to Jesus, who is our King. And listen to Him. May we imitate Him in doing good, because that's always permissible, and cultivating hearts that are merciful, and seeing people as important, and keeping the Sabbath day holy. May we receive with gratitude the gift of this day. Rest and worship and praise the Lord for the glorious salvation that we have together in Christ. Let's pray.

Father in Heaven, thank You for the merciful gift of the Sabbath, a day to rest and worship and give You thanks. Thank You for the merciful gift of Your Son, in whom we have life and forgiveness and salvation. May we delight in You always and in Your gifts. May we be those who do good and show mercy and are just glad to be Christians. And it's in the name of Jesus that we pray all of these things. Amen.