
# Living Hope PCA Sermons

## Matthew 24:36-25:13 - The Day and Hour of Christ's Return


Good morning. Every week when we recite the Apostles' Creed, we declare together the basic facts that all true Christians believe. And one of those facts is that Jesus Christ is coming again to judge the living and the dead. This return of the Lord Jesus is what Christians call the Second Coming. That Jesus is now reigning in heaven, but one day he will come again. Now, this is taught in many places in the Bible. And today's Scripture text is one of those places.

We're nearing the end of the Gospel of Matthew. The intensity of the conflict between Jesus and the religious leaders of his day is increasing. And it won't be very long before Jesus is arrested and then crucified. And we're in the middle of a private conversation that Jesus is having with his disciples. It's a conversation that started because of some of the things Jesus had said. Mainly he had said that the Temple, the center of religious worship for the Jews, would be destroyed, it would be thrown down. The disciples had asked him when that would happen.

And last week we looked at the beginning of his response, how he spoke about Jerusalem, how it would be judged and then destroyed, something which occurred in 70 AD and how they would see the signs that this was about to happen and what they were to do in response to that impending judgment. But now he moves from that period of time which he refers to as those days and talks about signs to a different end of the age, to the end to the Second Coming, to that day or even that hour. He says that day and that hour. And today we're going to begin our consideration of what Jesus says to the disciples about this.

So hear the word of the Lord this morning from Matthew 24, beginning at verse 36. But concerning that day and hour, no one knows, not even the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but the Father only. For as were the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. For as in those days before the flood, they were eating and drinking and marrying and giving in marriage until the day when Noah entered the ark, and they were unaware until the flood came and swept them all away. So will be the coming of the Son of Man.

Then two men will be in the field. One will be taken and one left. Two women will be grinding at the mill. One will be taken and one left. Therefore stay awake, for you do not know on what day your Lord is coming. But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what part of the night the thief was coming, he would have stayed awake and would not have let his house be broken into. Therefore you also must be ready. For the Son of Man is coming at an hour you do not expect.

Who then is the faithful and wise servant whom his master has set over his household to give them their food at the proper time? Blessed is that servant whom his master will find so doing when he comes. Truly, I say to you, he will set him over all his possessions. But if that wicked servant says to himself, my master is delayed, and begins to beat his fellow servants and eats and drinks with drunkards, the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him, and in an hour he does not know, and will cut him in pieces and put him with the hypocrites. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Then the kingdom of heaven will be like 10 virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. Five of them were foolish and five were wise. For when the foolish took their lamps, they took no oil with them. But the wise took flasks of oil with their lamps. And as the bridegroom was delayed, they all became drowsy and slept. But at midnight there was a cry, here is the bridegroom, come out to meet him. Then all those virgins rose and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said to the wise, give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out. But the wise answered, saying, since there will not be enough for us, and for you, go rather to the dealers and buy for yourselves.

While they were going to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut. Afterward the other virgins came also, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered, truly, I say to you, I do not know you. Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour. This is the word of the Lord this morning.

So when will Jesus return? That's been something which Christians have contemplated since the earliest days of the church. The history of the world is full of secret second comings. Somewhere someone reports that Jesus has come again, as well as Bible codes and methods that people have used to determine dates and times in the Bible. And they've applied their puzzle solving techniques. And this has led to some of the strangest, most distracting things that we know, as well as harmful things for God's people.

Christians have been led into a great unfruitful distraction as they have focused sometimes in on a single day that some person that they listen to, who reports to have studied the Bible very carefully on this, says, this is the day that Jesus is going to return. And everybody reacts to that. During our men's Bible study last week, I was reminded of one of the classic end time stories, the The Late Great Planet Earth. Some of you might remember that from back in the day. More recently there was the Left Behind book series and movie, which even has came with its own board game, which is declared by Amazon as the classic contest between good and evil.

The level of goofiness that has emerged through alleged careful Bible study and finding hidden codes and secrets might make one cautious actually about even talking about the Second Coming. It's just gotten weird a lot of times. But what we have to do is set the distractions aside and look at what Jesus is actually saying to his disciples and to us here. Because it's not weird. It's important. It's not trivial. It's not silly. It's very real.

And what Jesus begins here by saying is apparently what all those careful Bible students who predicted the exact dates of Jesus's return have decided to ignore says, but concerning that day and hour, no one knows, not even the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but the Father only. Jesus makes this declaration. And then he gives us an illustration. He says, it's like in Noah's day. You know the story of Noah. He describes him. He says, the people, they're eating and they're drinking and they're marrying and they're giving in marriage. They're just living their lives all as is as it ever was until it wasn't. And until the day when Noah entered the ark, Jesus says, and the flood came and swept them all away.

Now he's beginning to bring to our attention some emphases that he wants us to know as his people emphases about his return. The first is this very clear refrain that you'll see here throughout, which is that no one knows the day. Unlike the case of the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD where Jesus gives them certain signs that they could look for, there are no signs given. No one knows when it will happen. Christ will come again when the Father's will calls for him to come again. As for us, what we will be doing is we will be eating and drinking and marrying and giving one another in marriage.

Jesus goes on, he describes the Second Coming in this way. He says, there's two men in the field, they're just doing their normal things. And one. One is suddenly swept away. Two women grinding at a mill. They're doing normal daily work, daily things. And then all of a sudden, everything changes. One of them is swept away.

So the first one is that just no one knows the day. The second thing that we see here about the Second Coming of Christ is that it will be sudden and immediate and final. There is no siege. There is no extra time for a person to flee. Oh, now I've got to do it. There's no second chance opportunities at this point in time. There are no warning signs like the endless ones that you might receive when your subscription services are about to expire. There's none of that. It's sudden and it's immediate and it's final.

And then the third emphasis is that there is going to be a division. There will be those who are swept away and there will be those who are not. And then the fourth and final one which he gives us here is that it will also be. It'll be universal and it'll be visible. It's. It's like in Noah's day. It's. Everyone's included. And Jesus has already declared previously that when he comes, it won't be hidden at all. It's not like the time when he came as a baby and no one knew was going on. And what we're sort of discovering through the Gospel. When he comes again, there'll be no doubt. His coming will be like the lightning that comes from the east and shines as far as the west. There will be no confusing what's happening. It'll be universal. It'll be visible. The eyes won't be spiritual visible. Second Coming of Christ.

And so he gives instructions to his disciples. And he says, since this is the way that it's going to be, you must be alert. You've got to be alert because you don't know on what day the Lord is coming. So be alert. Here's what you know. If the master of a house had known when the thief would come, he would have stayed awake. But since you don't know, you got to stay awake all the time. He says, you got to be awake. You got to be alert. You don't know when. And so you also must be ready. The Son of Man is coming at an hour you do not expect.

But what does that mean? I mean, how is one to be ready for such an event? I think Jesus, by using the example of Noah, hints at what he means. Noah built the ark in obedience to the Lord, and he got into it as well. He was a righteous man. He trusted the Lord. He did what the Lord called him to do in obedience.

But Jesus tells a parable about a couple of servants to illustrate further these things about his coming again. So he paints this picture, and now he's going to drive down, give us a little bit more detail. He says, well, there's this servant and the servant sort of set over the household. So he's the chief and he's got a job, a real purpose. And this is the purpose that he's supposed to make sure everybody has food. Okay? And any mother of a larger family or maybe even a smaller family knows that that event alone can consume most of your life. So here is a person who is responsible for making sure that all the servants in the house are fed when they need to be fed, to give them food at the proper time.

What does that kind of work require? Well, requires discipline. Right? Requires discipline. It requires some level of attention to detail. You've got to have the things that you need in order to provide the food that needs to be provided. It requires some knowledge, it requires some leadership and some personal skill. This is the work that's required of this servant.

So the master goes away and he leaves the servant to do what he's asked him to do. And there's just a delay in when he's supposed to return. And then Jesus says that then the master just shows up. And the question is, what does he see? Jesus then describes two kinds of servants, the faithful servant and the wicked servant. And that this is the important question, what kind of servant is he?

The faithful servant has been just that. He's been faithful in his work for the master. We might say he's been trustworthy, he's been high integrity, he's good at what he does, and he serves with a sincere heart. The master comes and finds him doing his work, doing what he's been called to do. He's not someone who sits around and waits for the master to come back home. He's somebody who is active. The faithful servant is an active person.

What's the reward? Additional responsibility. Many children would think that's a horrible reward. But those of you who know that when you've done a good job and someone rewards you with additional responsibility, it's a beautiful thing because you've wanted to please this person and your job is being affirmed as well done. And there's blessings that come with additional responsibility. And so you. He gives this reward. Greater labors, greater blessings. In the kingdom of the master.

The wicked servant sees that the master is delayed. And apparently he must have been delayed for quite some time because it allows for. We see that it allows for sort of the heart of the wicked servant to sort of show itself. He proceeds to start beating the other servants. And it says that he's like a glutton and a drunkard. He. He takes stuff for himself. He's about himself ultimately. He doesn't value the master. He doesn't value the master's things. He doesn't value the master's servants. He only grabs for himself. He doesn't value the work that he's been given to do.

What's his reward? Well, Jesus said something here which must have just like, made everybody kind of, you know, wake up. He says his reward is destruction. He'll be cut into pieces by the master and carved up and put with the hypocrites in hell. Those are the two options.

What we observe is that the faithful servant, a faithful servant is always thinking about the master. He's always thinking about the master and how to please him. And so he doesn't need to worry or be anxious about when the master returns, because he's always desirous of pleasing the master and he's doing those things that will. The wicked servant doesn't think about the master much. He thinks about himself. And yet he really ought to worry about the master returning. So this is what we see. The faithful and the wicked servant.

Well, what are the emphases? Well, we see again, no one knows the day the master will come. On a day when the servant doesn't expect him, and at an hour he does not know. And it will be sudden, immediate, final. The master comes with judgment. The judgment against wickedness is severe and final. You cannot become uncut. You cannot glue yourself back together again. It's over. And there will be a division. The wicked servant is judged and dies. The faithful servant is rewarded.

But there's an additional one here. And that is, it'll be personal. It's the master who's coming. And he will look at each of us and he will make his judgment. It's not God in a general way, doing general things. It will be personal.

And so here we have instruction, further instructions to his disciples. He shows by way of this illustration what the Lord is calling them to do. What it means to be ready, what it means to be prepared, be faithful in his service, show wisdom in fearing the Lord and loving him as the master. This will work itself out in every area of your life. All of us, each person in this room has been given great responsibilities in God's kingdom. May we serve Christ in them all. May we be so about living a faithful Christian life and loving Christ, the master in our hearts that our minds aren't ever anxious about when Christ might return, because we're looking forward to it. We want to meet him. We love to serve him. We love to do the things that he's calling us to do.

When I was young, we went. I had an aunt whose name was Aunt Elsie. That was her name. And we loved going to her house. But there were a couple things, you know. One was that she had this really scary scarecrow where we had to sleep. And I didn't like that. But. But the other was we would be. We would be sitting in her kitchen, and this is kind of a fundamentalist nightmare. We were playing cards, and I would be cheating, right? Trying to see what my brothers were doing. And she had this cross stitch that was up, and it was like, if Jesus returned today, what would he find you doing okay. And I remember going. And just being, like, utterly terrified by this picture. It always scared me. What if when Jesus returned at that moment, I wasn't doing something good? Right.

Is. Is that what Jesus is saying? The reason for the faithful servant and the wicked servant picture is that he's talking about a life. It's not that, you know, you're living faithfully, and then Christ comes at the moment when you're particularly sinning, like, oh, well, everything else gets thrown out the window because he caught you. Which is that, well, how I. How I was so afraid of that, of that picture.

Jesus here depicts the faithful servant as one who's thinking about his return with grateful anticipation, not anxiety. He's about his tasks. For the Christian, that task can include the task of confessing sin. Can it? One of our tasks is to always do that. Why? Well, we aren't going to be without sin in this life, of course, but we ought to want to repent of it quickly because in some ways, the little picture was right. Would I really want Christ to come and find me cheating and looking at my brother's cards? Right. So we repent of things quickly. We don't want to hold on to those things. We don't want to develop a wicked heart.

You don't know when Jesus will come. Just in case there remains any confusion, Jesus tells his disciples one final parable to drive point. Drive the point home about his coming. He tells of these 10 virgins, young girls that were part of a wedding celebration. No idea. There's very little that talks about wedding celebrations in the day. But clearly they were a part of some sort of ceremony where you'd go to the wedding feast and they were supposed to lead the party, the wedding party there.

They all had lamps. And they all looked the same on the outside, like a wedding you might see today. There's the bridesmaids, these ladies all dressed the same. They all have their lamps. But the Bible says Jesus is telling the parable. He says, but five of them were foolish and five of them were wise. And the wise took some extra oil with them and the foolish didn't. And the bridegroom is delayed, because this is a common theme. There's a delay and the girls go to sleep. All of them go to sleep, okay? So we know now that it's okay for you to sleep. When Jesus says to stay awake, he's not saying, you've got to always be awake.

So everybody's sleeping. And then the cry comes that the bridegroom is near and the sleeping young girls are all awakened. Okay? And the foolish ask if they can borrow some of the oil from the wise ones. And the wise ones say, no. And so the foolish ones have to leave. The bridegroom heads into the wedding feast and the wise girls are invited in. And the foolish ones. The door is shut and the foolish ones are on the outside. And they try to get in. But the bridegroom answers, truly, I say to you, I do not know you.

What's being emphasized? Well, that no one knows the day watch. Therefore, he says at the end of the parable. For you know neither the day nor the hour. We see again that there is a division. There are the five wise and there are the five foolish. What will you be? There is a suddenness, a finality. The cry goes out, the bridegroom comes. There's no time for them to sort of fix whatever problems they had. Instead, they're locked out. They're forever on the outside of the feast. There's no way for them to get in. There is nothing that they can do. And it will be personal. The bridegroom is also the doorkeeper, he says. He looks in their eyes and he tells them that, I do not know you.

There will be those who, when Jesus comes again, he will look directly into their eyes and say those terrible words. Truly, I say to you, I do not know you. But to the wise, he looks into their eyes and he invites them into the feast.

Now, on top of all that, there's a call here to responsibility. You're responsible for yourself. There is no way to enter the kingdom as a result of someone else's faith. There's no borrowing oil. You've got to have your own oil. You've got to be spiritually ready yourself, prepared yourself.

He gives them these instructions. Disciples, he says, watch. Be prepared. You don't know when he's coming. Jesus has been speaking to his disciples. He's told them his. His Second Coming is going to be on a day and in an hour that no one knows. It will be visible and unmistakable. It will be personal. The Son of Man, like the master coming, or the bridegroom, will deal with each one of us personally. It will be sudden, like the flood and Noah's day, like a thief in the night, like lightning flashing across the sky. And there will be a final division between those who belong to the king, his servants, those who have repented of their sins and cried out to Christ for salvation by faith, and those who don't, those who've rejected him, those who've rebelled against him, those who don't think about him too much.

So which are you? I mean, it's really the important question. Know that when Jesus returns, there will be no extra time at that point to consider that question. There are no second chances. We will all face the master. We will all face the king.

Until that time, the Scriptures call on us as Christians. Is clear to be prepared. Confess your sins, strive to know Christ, to be faithful, actively doing what the Lord has called you to do, to be ready, to be watchful, alert in prayer, desiring God's will in the world to be done. Though we don't know the day or the hour, we know that the end is nearer today than yesterday. And it can be at any time, at any moment.

Knowing this, the apostles gave out some instructions. Here's some things that they say on reflecting on the coming that the end is near. Paul writes, therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast, be immovable, always abound in the work of your Lord, knowing that your work in the Lord is not in vain. And he says, we. We make it our aim always to please God, for we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ so that each one may receive what is due for what he's done in the body, whether good or evil.

Paul writes to the Thessalonians. He says, well, since we're people that belong to the day and we know that the day is coming, since we know this, let's be sober. Let's put on the breastplate of faith and love and for a helmet. The hope of salvation for God hasn't destined us for wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us that that whether we are awake or asleep, we might live for him. Therefore encourage one another. Build one another up with these words.

James says this. He says, be patient, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. See how the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient about it until it receives the early and the late rains. You also be patient. Establish your hearts for the coming of the Lord is at hand. Don't grumble against each other so that you won't be judged because the judge is standing at the door. James says.

And then Peter. Peter, who was listening to this dialogue, says this. He says, the end of all things is at hand. Therefore be self-controlled and sober-minded for the sake of your prayers. Above all, keep loving one another earnestly. Since love covers over a multitude of sins, show hospitality to one another without grumbling. As each has received a gift, use it to serve one another as good stewards of God's varied grace. Whoever speaks as one who speaks the oracles of God. Whoever serves as one who serves with the strength that God supplies in order that in everything God may be glorified through Jesus Christ. To him belong glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen, says Peter.

Today, at this moment, Jesus has not yet come. So we will do what we always do. We will worship him and we will, in the Lord's Supper, proclaim his death. And Paul even says that we will do that until he comes. And we'll proclaim his death and what it means to the world, the master, the bridegroom. You see, he's just delayed. Every one of those stories is delayed. So he's delayed.

Well, what's about the delay? Why the delay? Well, the Apostle Peter reminds us that the reason for the delay is the patience of God shown in the spread of the Gospel. Listen to this. He says, don't overlook one fact, one fact. Don't overlook that with the Lord, one day is a thousand years, and a thousand years is a day. The Lord isn't slow to fulfill his promise. His delay isn't because he forgot and he forgot that he promised us something. The Lord isn't slow to fulfill his promise as some count slowness, but he's patient towards you, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance.

Do you understand that? Do you understand? Like if you came to faith, there was a moment before you came to faith where God and his patience chose not to send Jesus. Yet why? Because of you. Because he wanted you to come to faith. Because he was being patient with you. Not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance.

But the day of the Lord will come like a thief, and then the heavens will pass away with the war, and the heavenly bodies will be burned up and dissolved in the earth, and the works that are done on it will be exposed. The patience of the Lord is the reason for the delay. But Christ is coming again. The time is nearer every hour.

May we never be afraid of that fact, but may we give our lives to his faithful service at all times, being a people of prayer, faith, obedience, encouraging one another each and every day, loving one another as we were instructed, grateful that we have been called to be a part, part of the kingdom of God. And when he comes suddenly, visibly, personally, at a day and a time when nobody knows, may we be waiting, rejoicing, ready to welcome, praise and joy our glorious king, ready to sit at his wedding banquet, ready to serve and love and admire our glorious king, our glorious bridegroom, our glorious Savior, Jesus, our Lord.

Let's pray.