# Matthew 23 - Jesus the Prophet

Good morning.

Growing up in a home of. There were three brothers together. So myself, a couple of brothers older and one younger, one older, there tended to be a lot of arguing, if you can imagine. And one might say that we even liked to argue, really about anything. The goal, of course, was not to gain knowledge or understanding of one another, but to win the argument. All methods of winning could be employed. And although it was often difficult at the end of these things to discern if there really were any winners here, we continued to do that until probably our mid-30s or so when we looked at each other and said, why do we keep doing this? And we sort of stopped.

We've. We've been in this section of Scripture. If you're visiting with us today, we're going through the Gospel of Matthew and it's the story of Jesus. And we. We've. We've been in this section of Scripture where there. There's been a great deal of tension between Jesus and the religious leaders of his day, particularly a group called the Pharisees, or sometimes it's phrased together the Pharisees and the scribes, kind of a subset experts on God's law. And they love to argue. They like to argue, to discuss down to the smallest details God's law and what counted and what didn't count, what you should do, what you shouldn't do. And they love to argue. But Jesus didn't. And they applied all of their arguing prowess to try to. In these recent sort of sections that we've been looking at together, they've tried with all their arguing prowess to discredit Jesus, but they couldn't.
And in the section right before what we're going to read today, Jesus has quoted a psalm from the Old Testament, Psalm 110, and essentially not only put the Pharisees in their place, but in doing so, even took to himself, claimed for himself the title of the Christ. And not only that, he had inferred by using this Psalm that he was not only the Christ, but he was also the Son of God and the King of the Jews. And that same psalm also carried with it, as Jesus. Apostles would later note in some of their writings that the picture of Christ was one where he was also the great high priest, the one who stands between God and man.

But unlike my brothers and I there, there's. There's just no sense in the Scriptures at all that Jesus took any delight in arguing with these Pharisees. He didn't enjoy putting them in their place. He didn't celebrate that he had won every argument that he ever was in. There's a sense where all of this made him sad and at times quite angry. In today's text, Jesus is going to take on a third role, that of a prophet. He's king, he's the son of David and the son of God, and he's priest, the one mediator between God and man. And he is prophet now. Now, a prophet in the Bible isn't merely someone. Sometimes we think of prophets. We think of somebody who just predicts the future. But a prophet in the Bible isn't merely that a predictor of future events, although there's some of that. Rather, the prophets are people who might serve, you might say, as. As God's prosecuting attorneys. They. They declare indictments against God's people, judgments against them and against the nations around them for how they've violated God's law, how they've broken their relationship with God.
So the prophets are people who we see in the Bible give warnings, they plead with people, they pronounce God's judgment for certain things, and who are often as they. You see them, as they reflect on what they're doing, you find that they're often quite sad and even at times a bit angry. So we'll see this today as we. As we'll consider this text. It's Matthew 23. So you can turn with me there and hear the word of the Lord this morning.

Matthew 23:

> Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples, "The scribes and the Pharisees. They sit on Moses' seat. So do and observe whatever they tell you, but not the works they do, for they preach, but they do not practice. They tie up heavy burdens, hard to bear, and they lay them on people's shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to move them with their finger. They do all their deeds to be seen by others, for they make their phylacteries broad and their fringes long, and they love the place of honor at feasts and the best seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the marketplace, and being called rabbi by others. But you are not to be called rabbi, for you have one teacher, and you are all brothers. Call no man your father on earth, for you have one Father who is in heaven. Neither be called instructors, for you have one instructor, the Christ, the greatest among you shall be your servant. And whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. For you shut the kingdom of heaven in people's faces. For you neither enter yourselves, nor allow those who would enter to go in. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. For you travel across sea and land to make a single proselyte, and when he becomes a proselyte, you make him twice as much a child of hell as yourselves.
And Woe to you, blind guides who say, 'Well, if anyone swears by the temple, it's nothing. But if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is bound by his oath,' you blind fools. For which is greater, the gold or the temple that's made the gold sacred? And you say, 'If anyone swears by the altar, it's nothing. But if anyone swears by the gift on the altar, he's bound by his oath,' you blind men. Which is greater, the gift or the altar? That makes the gift sacred. So whoever swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it. And whoever swears by the temple swears by it by him who dwells in it. And whoever swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and by him who sits upon it.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. You tithe mint and dill and cumin, and have neglected the weightier matters of the law, justice and mercy and faithfulness. These you ought to have done without neglecting the others, you blind guides, straining out a gnat and swallowing a camel.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. For you clean the outside of the cup and the plate, but inside they're full of greed and self-indulgence, you blind Pharisee. First clean the inside of the cup and the plate, that the outside also may be clean.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. You're like whitewashed tombs which outwardly appear beautiful, but within are full of dead people's bones and all uncleanness. So you also outwardly appear righteous to others, but within you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. For you build the tombs of the prophets, and you decorate the monuments of the righteous, saying, 'Well, if we had lived in the days of our fathers, we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.' And thus you witness against yourselves that you are sons of those who murdered the prophets. Fill up then the measure of your fathers, you serpents. You brood of vipers. How are you to escape being sentenced to hell?
Therefore I send you prophets and wise men and scribes, some of whom you will kill and crucify. Some you will flog in your synagogues and persecute from town to town, so that on you may come all the righteous blood shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah, the son of Barakaya, whom you murdered between the sanctuary and the altar. Truly I say to you, all these things will come upon this generation.
Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her. How often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you were not willing. See, your house is left to you desolate. For I tell you, you will not see me again until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.'"
This is the word of the Lord.
This morning, in, in the text this morning we, we hear Jesus declaring, "Woe, woe. You know, woe to the Pharisees scribes." But before he does that, he warns the crowds and the disciples and he gives this summary statement that's there if you have your Bibles with you. It's in verse 12. But it, he, he says this, he declares this, he says, "Who, whoever exalts himself will be humbled and whoever humbles himself will be exalted."

It's sort of the summary for him of this warning.

Jesus has laid out as the prophet his general case against the Pharisees. And the scribes, he says, know they sit in Moses's seat. In other words, they're in the position of prophets of those who declare and interpret God's word, just like Moses did. And to the extent that they're doing that, Jesus says, you know, you can do and observe whatever they tell you. But then he says, but don't just don't do the works that they do, don't do not imitate them. I mean, because look at their lives. And, and he characterizes then their lives by, by, by three things.
The first is that they lack integrity. They, they preach, but they don't practice. We might say that their lives don't match their words. Good, righteous words may come from their mouths, but their lives don't match that they lack integrity.
The second thing that Jesus says that their lives are characterized by is that they lack sympathy. He says they weigh down people under. On burdens that are too heavy to bear. In other words, people are being crushed under the weight of all of the righteous regulations, the righteousness regulations that they set up about what it means to be a Good person, you're going to have to do this, this, this, this, this, this. They weigh the people down, but they don't care. They won't lift a finger to help. How different this is than Jesus, by the way, who said that his yoke is easy and that his burden is light and that his. What he is seeking to give to those who come to him is rest for their souls. But. But not the Pharisees. They lacked sympathy. They didn't care. They're standing there amongst the crowd of people who they. They don't care about any of them. Jesus, we know, looked at the crowds and it says that he would have compassion on them. The. The Pharisees might look at crowds and see problems and people who just don't get it. You need to be fixed. They lack sympathy.
And then third, the thing that characterize their life is that they lack humility. Jesus goes to a series of things. They want their outward displays of righteousness to be seen by other people. They love to be honored. They love that attention. They love being called rabbi, he says they love their titles. So here is Jesus the prophet and his warning to his disciples and to the crowds. Don't be like them. Don't imitate them. He even goes in, he says, for you are not to be called rabbi and call no man your father on earth, and neither be called instruction, instructor. Rather, Jesus. Point is, he's saying, anyone who. Who loves God must see the greatness of. Of God, that he is the one teacher, that he is the one Father, that Christ is the one instructor, the. With the capital. You know, the big, the. The Father, the instructor, the rabbi, the teacher. The Pharisees and scribes, they took these titles to themselves. Teacher, father, instructor. They were proud. They loved to be called these things. Now, Jesus is not setting up for us some sort of burdensome fundamentalist rule his own here. Like, you know, no one should ever have any titles. And if you do, you're bad. If you're out there today and you're doctor something that remove the doctor now, he's not doing that. He's not saying that if you called your father father today or dad Father, that you have sinned in doing that. He's setting the Pharisees up for the judgment, the woes he's about to declare. And he's reminding all of them of the greatness of the Christ, the greatness of the Father, and how no one should ever put himself or herself into the place of God out of his pride, which is what the Pharisees did. When they took those titles. So maybe you should remove Dr. If you really like hearing people say Dr. Because they love to hear that Jesus warning stands today.
Of course, the Christian leader ought to be marked by integrity. If I don't practice what I preach, I should not be standing here for your sake. You should remove me. They ought to be people who are the same person at home and at work and in the pulpit. Christian leaders ought to be people of sympathy, who care for others and not just their own interests, not just someone who tells other people how to live and then creates an environment where those under his care always have a sense that they don't measure up. And the Christian leader ought to be a person who's marked by humility because, of course, there's no place for pride, for exalting oneself and Christian leadership because Christ is exalted.
But really, those ought to be the marks of all Christians. See, you can't escape integrity, sympathy and humility. The Bible teaches us this with regards to elders and all of this. Here's just a couple of passages. This is Paul writing to the church in Thessalonica. And he says, you know, our appeal doesn't spring. Our appeal of the Gospel to you doesn't spring from error or impurity or some attempt to deceive you. But just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, so we speak not to please man, but to please God who tests our hearts. We never came with words of flattery, as you know, nor with a pretext for greedy. God is witness. We don't seek glory from people, whether from you or from others, though we could have made demands as apostles, but we were gentle among you, like a nursing mother taking care of her own children. So, being affectionately desirous of you, we were ready to share with you not only the gospel of God, but also our own selves, because you have become very dear to us. I can't picture a Pharisee writing that you have become very dear to us. But here we find Paul doing that. A picture of sympathy and integrity, not coming to them with hearts full of greed, but with the gospel.
Peter says it like this, includes all of us, starting with the elders. He says, "I exhort the elders among you as a fellow elder and a witness of of the sufferings of Christ, as well as a partaker in the glory that's to be revealed, shepherd the flock of God that is among you, exercising oversight not under compulsion, but willingly, as God would have you, not for shameful gain, but eagerly, not domineering over those in your charge, but being examples to the flock. And when the chief shepherd appears, you will receive the unfading crown of glory. Likewise, you who are younger, be subject to the elders. Clothe yourselves, and here you go. Clothe yourselves, all of you, with humility toward one another. For God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble." It's a picture again of humility, integrity.
Here's John. He says, "By this we know love, that we laid down his life. He laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers. But if anyone has the world's goods and he sees his brother in need, yet he closes his heart against him, how does God's love abide in him? Little children, let us not love in word and talk, but in deed and in truth." It's this picture of humility. Your life, your words, they match. You can't love in your talk and then do nothing when there's a need laid out in front of your face. That's the picture that John sets forward for us.
And then James, he says, "Who's wise and understanding among you by his good conduct, let him show his works in the meekness of wisdom. If you have bitter jealousy or if you have selfish ambition in your hearts, don't boast. Don't be false to the truth. That's not the wisdom that comes down from above. That's earthly wisdom, unspiritual, demonic. Where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there'll be disorder and every vile practice. But the wisdom that is from above is first of all pure and peaceable, gentle, open to reason, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial and sincere. And a harvest of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace." It's a picture of sympathy, caring for other people and their needs and concerns, of humility. I'm not doing things from selfish ambition, grabbing for myself. You see, these are the marks of the Christian humility and sympathy and integrity. A life that matches the words you speak. Heart for other people, that other people become dear to you. And a humility that always looks at Christ and doesn't look to have myself exalted and appreciated and honored.
So here is Jesus the prophet, warning the disciples and the crowds against the pharisaical life that lacks integrity and sympathy and humility. And, of course, that call is to us this morning. So, of course, we must ask ourselves, are we a people of integrity, sympathy, and humility? Something to think about.

After warning the crowds and his disciples, Jesus then turns to the pharisees and scribes within. Within earshot. Like, Like Jeremiah, like Isaiah, like Ezekiel, like all these Old Testament prophets. Jesus in a. In his prophet role, he now declares judgment on all those who are false shepherds in Israel in his day. Seven woes. You heard them. When I read the text, the woe was kind of a cry. In the Bible, when there's woe to you for whatever reason, the woe is sort of a cry that says, time is running out. You know, time is running out. Pay attention. He's saying to the Pharisees and the scribes.

Now, in these seven woes, Jesus notes that the Pharisees and scribes are actually actively doing several things. So they're not sort of just sitting in a cave talking wisdom. The Pharisees are active. They're out there. They're doing stuff. And here's some of the things that they're doing. They're making disciples. Okay, sounds pretty good. Good idea. Maybe, like Christians should do that. So they're making disciples, and they're guiding people. You know, they're trying to guide people with respect to what it means to obey the law of God, the law of Moses. We find them. Jesus speaks to them as those who are active. They tithe. They're a tithing set, okay? So they take that 10% very, very seriously. So the tithing, we find them, Jesus finds them striving to keep themselves pure before God as they understand. Cleaning the dish, he calls it. They clean the dish. They try to make themselves righteous and clean. And we find that they actually look the part. They are looking beautiful, looking righteous, looking like good people, solid religious authorities. And then we find that they do this thing, which I think. I guess this just keeps going on for all eternity, because we do this too. But they're apologizing for the past sins of their fathers and then building monuments to the people that their fathers killed. So this is a whole culture that does that. They apologize for the past, and they do that thing where they say, like, well, you know, they didn't know what they were doing back then, but if we lived back then, we would have done a much better job. Okay?

So this is what they do. They make disciples. They guide people. They tithe. They are striving to keep themselves pure. They look beautiful and righteous, and they're building monuments to those who their fathers had killed. But in his declarations of woe, Jesus does something. He kind of uncovers some stuff and he states the truth. So I. I had a car that my son and I had purchased, and or actually as my daughter. So it was a long time ago we had purchased this car and it was, it worked great for us for a very long time. But at some point in time, it's like the first time that it started raining outside and, and then it was like sort of polleny, you know, so your, your windshield gets all that yellow pollen all over it. So we, you know, the rain stopped and the pollen's still there a little bit afterwards, you know, comes down the next day and we're like, well, let's just shoot some of that windshield wiper fluid. Oh, well, you press, you pull the little thing or push the button and, and no windshield wiper fluid comes out.

So I mean, you know, this is the easiest, this is the easiest problem you will ever have in cars, right? So I go and I buy windshield wiper fluid and I open the hood and then I'm like, where's the little container to put the fluid in? So I'm looking everywhere. I figured, well, maybe they must have this in some fancy place in the car. And I'm looking and then all of a sudden I'm not a car person, but I am able to see some things. And I noticed that an entire section of the car was empty. And I was thinking, I didn't have anything to put the windshield wiper fluid in. There was no ca. You know, you open the hood, you saw what it was there. There was nothing. Jesus opens the hood. That's all he's doing. He's like, here's this car. It looks great, everything running, you know, whatever. It looks great from the outside. He opens the hood. Except worse than nothing. Well, the woes sort of say it all. When he opens the hood, what he sees are hypocrites. It's a religion with nothing good inside. It's a show, it's an act. It's pretending to be what you're not. They're, they're self deceived. They think they're something when they're nothing. Jesus says what they do is that they slam the door of the kingdom of God in people's faces. They refuse to enter the kingdom themselves and, and then they slam the door. And then they make little Pharisee disciples who are worse than they are. Okay, so like they were bad, they were like religiously bad. But their disciples, oh, they were even worse. They were even more scrupulous about law keeping, I suppose. But they slammed the door of the kingdom of God in people's faces.

Then he says, you know, they're blind. They're blind guides, they're blind fools. They're blind men. Jesus is saying these things to them. And when the hood is open, there's lots of words about rules and ways to escape doing this or that rule. You know, if you kind of follow it this way, what will, what won't offend God. But you know what's not in there is justice and mercy and faithfulness. That's why they have that little, he has that little saying like they, they strain out the little gnat. They, they make sure that you get down to the, the tiniest little rule. But then in everything that's important, like the camel, they're, they don't see it. When the hood's open, there's no beauty. Rather like the car looks nice on the outside. But what they see on the inside, Jesus says, is greed and self indulgence and uncleanness and lawlessness and dead man's bones. And with all their words that they would say about, like not killing the prophets, oh, if we live back then we would, you know, we're so smart now. We would be way, way better on the whole prophet thing. They're about to kill Jesus. He says, you're, you're all, you're first you're admitting that you're related to everybody else. And then what you're going to do is you're going to just keep piling it on because you're going to kill me and then you're going to kill all of those who are following me currently. I mean, the murder is going to continue. You're going to murder Christians, you're going to kill Christians. Some, you'll kill some. You'll crucify those who are being sent for the blessing of God's people. You will kill them and you will murder them just like your fathers did. And so Jesus calls them serpents, a brood of vipers, murderers.

Earlier, Jesus had said these men sat on Moses's seat, but it seems that really only Jesus belongs there. They're. They're imposters. And then he has this climactic question. The crowds are listening, the disciples are listening. The Pharisees and scribes who are still there, they're listening. And Jesus asks them this question. Given all of this, you do all these things, but on the inside, something quite different. Considering all of that, how are you to escape being sentenced to hell?

Jesus asked that question last week. We talked about the most important question for all of us being what do you think about the Christ? Who do you think the Christ is? This question's Another good one couldn't Jesus? And doesn't the scripture sort of ask us the same question? Because the scripture's testimony is that all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God, that if you look under the hood of all people, no matter how good they look on the outside, no matter what shiny stuff they surround themselves with, when you look under the hood. And you know this from your own life, because we let people look under the hood a little bit. Who knows every thought that you had yesterday when you encountered people? God does. The Bible says that all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God, that the wages of sin is death. And that if we say that we have no sin, where we just deceive ourselves, like, if we think we're just good people, we haven't explored anything. We haven't opened the hood. We haven't seen what's really in our hearts. I mean, can we say, really, can we say if I lived back then, I would not be like those Pharisees? If I lived back then, I would have seen Jesus for exactly who he was and would have worshiped him from day one? I mean, wouldn't we be like the Pharisees, the scribes or the crowds or even the disciples? I mean, somebody. They're all sinners. They're all in the same boat. Wouldn't we be somebody like that? I mean, shouldn't we all be asking, how can we escape being sentenced to hell?

Isn't that what the crowds asked Peter after Jesus's death and resurrection and ascension and the pouring out of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, when Peter and the apostles start preaching with real power the Gospel, and the Bible says it cut to the heart. Cut to the heart. The crowds ask, brothers, what. What can we do? Isn't this the concern of the Philippian jailer who asked Paul, what must I do to be saved? How can we escape this dreaded sentence that falls on all people because of sin?

The gospel is that there is an answer to the question. Peter answered it like this. When they said, what shall we do? He said, repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of your sins, and you'll receive the gift of your Holy Spirit. Paul answered the jailer like this when he said, what must I do? How do I escape the sentence? He says, believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved, you and your whole household. And to the proud men of Athens who love to sit around and says and just talk about nothing and everybody Thought, wow, the philosophers, oh, we still study them. They, they like to talk about nothing. And Paul would say to them, the times of ignorance. Can you imagine, like the whole world of philosophy sitting there and these philosophers. And he says, the time of ignorance God has overlooked. But now he commands all people everywhere to repent because he's fixed a day on which he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he's appointed. And he has given us this assurance that to all by raising him from the dead.

John says to his first letter in the to his Christian brothers and sisters, I'm writing these things to you that you wouldn't sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous. He's the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. The propitiation for our sins. Christ took the wrath of God. That's what the fancy word means. He took the wrath of God for us on the cross. Our sentence was nailed there so that we would escape. He took our penalty so that we would escape the sentence of hell. And so the writer to the Hebrews says, and every priest stands daily at a service offering repeatedly the same sacrifices which can never take away the sins. But when Christ offered for all time one sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of God, waiting from that time until his enemies should be made a footstool for his feet by a single offering he perfected for all time. Those who are being sanctified, repent and believe the Gospel.

When we open the hood and when we see what we are, praise God that He has given us what we need for that situation, repentance and believe the Gospel. There is an escape from the sentence that we deserve for our sins. There is forgiveness for your sins in Christ. He bore our sin on the cross. And more than an escape, he gives us a new and a living way, a new heart, a new life. May we never go back. But rather, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, let us also lay aside every weight and sin which clings so closely to us. Let us run with endurance the race that's set before us, looking to Jesus, always the founder and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame. Now he sees the right hand of God, Jesus the prophet. He's both declaring judgment against the Pharisees, and yet he opens the door for them, for the one thing, the one thing that would save them just like we can live our whole lives thinking we're something. And we can. Oh man. But Jesus in the gospel opens the door for the one thing that will rescue your soul. Repentance. Hating our sin, grieving it, leaving it, and turning to Jesus for salvation. Repentance and faith.

The section that I read today ends with a very sad declaration. It's a prophet declaration. It's very much like in the Old Testament when Jerusalem's burning. Jeremiah is outside at the prophet. It's the city he loves, and he's watching as his friends have been killed, many of them, and, and the city that he cares about is burning to the ground and taken over by an enemy army. And he pens what are called the lamentations, which you can read in the Old Testament. And Jesus does something similar here when he speaks to Jerusalem, a Jerusalem. Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it.
And then we see the desire in the heart of God. And here it is, verse 37. How often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings to gather. Not like the Pharisees who gathered together to plot against Jesus, but this, this gathering that Jesus says that this is the heart of God. The desire of God is like a hen that gathers her brood under her wings. It's a picture of comfort and provision and protection. God's desire and heart was for their blessing, not, not for their harm.

But Jesus reminds us here of what their response was, not only the Pharisees, but of Jerusalem in general. He says, I gathered, I, I. How often would I have done this? And you were not willing. So your house is left desolate spiritually, of course, one day soon, physically, and in several years, a couple decades later, when Jerusalem's burned to the ground, the temples destroyed, and we read at the beginning of Matthew 24 that once he had said these things, the one whose house it actually was, Jesus himself. It says that he left the temple. The presence of God in the person of Jesus left and didn't return. The house was truly desolate.

But as he leaves, he tells them that they will see him again. Only when they say, blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. That's a code for scripture. Code for when the king returns, when he comes back. That was the proclamation that was. Was declared when he came into Jerusalem the first time. When he returns, we'll see him again. There's a sense where that happened at Pentecost, when there's pouring out of the spirit and power and the proclamation of the Gospel. There was a sense where that happened in AD 70, when the Jerusalem was destroyed. But in the greatest sense, it will happen when Christ returns to judge the living and the dead. He's coming again. The King is coming again.

Brothers and sisters in Christ, this picture of the heart and desire of God is as true today as it was then. God's heart isn't to tell you what to do in every piece of minutia and then to get angry when you get it wrong. That is a burden that in my opinion, far too many Christians carry around, that they just think if they get some piece wrong that God's just angry with, that they're bad. Well, you already know you're bad. Just lift up the hood. It's not the point. His heart also isn't just kind of play around with you because he's bigger and he can do that. Play around with your life, you know, why did God do this to me? It's not his heart. His heart heart is to gather, to comfort, to provide, to protect. He shows that heart in sending his Son to bear our sins on the cross, that we might be reconciled to God. He's shown his heart in our lives by giving us as Christians, the Holy Spirit to dwell in us and to grow us up under his wing. And out of that gracious heart he's calling all people here and everywhere to receive him, to come under his wing. That's what he wants. That's the heart of God. Not that you're operating independently there in a system of rules, that the first time you get it wrong, that you're bad and you're out. Well, that he's angry at you all the time. He's. He wants you under his wing because under his wing is never destined. He wants us to repent and then to follow Christ and to rejoice.

At our house is not desolate, you see, our heart is not desolate because the Spirit dwells in our heart. Our heart is Christ's home as a Christian. And our families aren't desolate. For the Lord is with us. It's only vain to build a house if you build it without the Lord, the scripture says. But if God is for us, we know he's at work building our families. They're not desolate. The church isn't desolate. For the Lord is building a spiritual house, building each one of us as living stones together. And even the world is not desolate. For Jesus has brought life and light into the world. His kingdom, which will never end, to culminate one day in the creation of a new heavens and a new earth. A place without sin, sorrow or death. A place that will never be desolate, for he will be there always.
Christians, those who are no longer those who are desolate. May we live then as those who are alive in Christ. May we be alive with joy. May we be alive with praise. May we be alive with truth and alive with faithfulness and alive with gratitude and alive with integrity, alive with sympathy, alive with humility, alive by God's grace in Christ, alive by the power of the Holy Spirit. And as those who are alive, who are saved by the grace of God, may we live in such a way that the world might see Christ in us. That they might flee from the desolation, the wrath of God against sin and might flee to this great and glorious gospel. Might flee to the kingdom of the beloved Son, Jesus Christ, our prophet, priest and king.

Let's pray.
