If you have your Bibles with you today, you can turn with me to Luke chapter 1. We're going to be looking at verses 46 through 55.

The Church throughout history has made it a part of her annual tradition to reflect on the prophecies surrounding the coming of Christ, the event of the birth itself, the anticipation of the second coming of our Lord, and what all of that means. These four weeks of reflection prior to Christmas are known as Advent, of which this is the fourth and final Sunday. On the first Sunday, we looked at the story of Jesus' healing of the two blind men in the Gospel of Matthew. In that story, the blind men cried out, "Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David." And over the last two weeks, we've broken down that cry by looking at some of the words of the prophet Isaiah. Two weeks ago, we considered our need for mercy. "Lord, have mercy on us." And then last week, we considered Jesus as the Son of David. "Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David," a phrase that emphasizes the kingship of Jesus, that he is our wonderful counselor and almighty God, everlasting Father and Prince of Peace. 

Hundreds of years passed since Isaiah's words, and the time came when Jesus was to be born. And as we come to the passage today, Mary has already been told by the angel Gabriel that she's going to have a son, and that he is to be called Jesus, and that he would be the Son of the Most High, and that God would give him the throne of his father, David. Mary was a virgin. Jesus would be miraculously conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit. Mary heard all of that from an angel that appeared to her one day. And so this was, I'm sure, quite overwhelming. Being encouraged by that angel, what Mary does next is, having heard these things, she travels to her cousin, Elizabeth, who also is pregnant. And in the course of that, Mary, I'm sure, has had time to think. Overwhelmed, and yet here she is. And when she arrives, Elizabeth's baby, and we know him to be later known as John the Baptist, is in Elizabeth's womb, and the baby leaps in the womb. And Elizabeth feels that and makes some commentary. And then Mary speaks in response, and that's the text that we're going to look at today, her words.

So this is the word of the Lord, Luke chapter 1. Mary said, "He has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts. He has brought down the mighty from their thrones and exalted those of humble estate. He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich He has sent away empty. He has helped His servant Israel in remembrance of His mercy as He spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and to his offspring forever." This is the word of the Lord. Mary's song.

You likely have in your own minds flashbacks towards to certain events. You can recall certain things in your past in great detail, maybe from your childhood, or a particularly lovely time that you had in some location, or maybe a very difficult incident that comes back up. I wonder what it was like for Mary. I mean, think back to the story of the blind man. That would be about 30 years after she spoke these words. So think back to that story of the blind man that Jesus healed. Here is Jesus, an adult, late 20s, heading up to Jerusalem for the Passover feast. And as we talked about before Advent, this would have been a time where entire families and sort of clans would kind of go up together. So Mary was there with them, with the disciples. Sometimes we have this picture of Jesus always just walking with these 12 people like this kind of thing. But it was often a crowd and often family. So Mary is there with them watching this. And she's heard Jesus say some hard things. She's heard her child, her son, say some hard things about what's going to happen to Himself, that suffering and death, that He would be killed and yet rise again. And she's in some ways in the same position as the disciples. Mary's heard all these things. And the Scripture says that she is elsewhere, that Mary was a ponderer. So she always was kind of contemplating, what does this mean? And she's pondering that. And so these two blind men come and Jesus heals them. And for Mary, here it is. Just another marvel. Just another marvel. 

I suppose at some level she was just glad for her son. Of course, only Mary would know really what it was like when Jesus was little. That's not something that we're told about in the Scriptures. But I don't think it's too much of a stretch to think that Mary would often go back to the beginning in her mind. Things would happen and she would go back to the beginning. She'd remember stuff. How could you not remember it? The flashback of her life. We know she remembered it because it's very likely that she was the one who was interviewed by Luke. This is what we have from her. So she's remembering these things, a flashback, that angel visitation and then her time with Elizabeth. And she'd likely remember as part of that flashback these words, this song, this text we're considering this morning, which was later recorded for us by Luke in his Gospel. 

It is a picture of Mary's response to the Lord and his work. So how does she respond to the Lord and his work? Well, I mean, simply put, she responds with praise. This is how this begins. Mary said, "My soul magnifies the Lord and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior." That's the nature of praise. Two things. Magnify. When you praise someone, you're making them great. You're exalting them. You're saying they are magnificent, lifted up. And you're rejoicing. It's a combo. These are not this kind of like magnifying words of some sort of cowering subject. These are joyful words. So praise has these two elements to it, that there is always magnifying and there is just rejoicing. Praise has this element of joy to it. Together. That's what praise looks like. 

And then we see also the object of Mary's praise, the Lord, the one who is sovereign over all things. He is the Lord. "My soul magnifies the Lord and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior." So the object of Mary's praise, the Lord, the one who is sovereign over all things, God my Savior, the one who saves his people and who will save Mary herself. The Scripture's picture of God as he reveals himself over the course of the Bible's history, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is one of sovereignty and salvation. That's just all over the Bible, everywhere. God is sovereign and this is a God who saves. Sovereignly meaning that the Lord rules and reigns, today and always, he reigns over all things, all nations, all history, all creation. He's sovereign and he rules over it all. Nothing escapes his rule. He's over everything. That's the Bible's testimony everywhere. 

And then also that there is salvation. Salvation meaning deliverance from all that would get in the way of us being able to enjoy the blessings of God. We need to be delivered from things that would get in the way of us being able to enjoy the blessings of God. Generally, we find in the Bible that when they cry out for salvation, there's usually a deliverance, a desire for deliverance from like some sort of wicked oppressors, wicked oppression of another nation. Not even it could be such things as natural disasters and illness. "Save us, save us." But most importantly, salvation concerns sin and its consequences. The Bible's testimony is that all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God. The wages of sin, the Bible says, is death. All people must face the judgment of God for sin. The only way to be saved from that judgment is to cry out to Christ in repentance and faith to believe in him. 

Mary praises as the object of her praise the Lord, the one who is sovereign, rules over everything, and the God who saves, who delivers so that he might be able to be enjoyed. We talk about sometimes in reform speak of the chief end of man being to glorify God and to enjoy him forever. How do you get there? The God of salvation must work first. You can't enjoy God until he's given you the ability to enjoy him. And the way he does that is through salvation. Sovereignty and salvation, those two things. So Mary praises God and she emphasizes that he is Savior and Lord. And Mary praises God, it says here, with her whole soul and my soul and my spirit for who he was and what he's done. This is what praise looks like. She did that her whole life. And in her song, in her words here, we learn a lot about the Lord and his work, that which she praised him for. So let's just turn our attention there for a moment and consider those things. 

What are the Lord and his work? Mary maybe at times had a flashback to those early days and these words before us today. I wonder if she ever, like, she's watching Jesus. I mean, she's watching Jesus. She's watching her son. And I wonder if she ever ran, like, his life and character through the lens of what she's saying is true here. Like, you know, had the birth and life of her son demonstrated these things that she said about God so many years before? Did her son reflect the character of his heavenly father that she proclaimed when she was young? And then I imagine the events that she had witnessed would just flood back into her mind. The might and power of Jesus's control over the wind and the waves or the feeding of the crowds or the healing of the blind or the raising of the dead. She would have witnessed all this compassion that he showed on so many occasions to those who were hurting and helpless and hopeless. The hungry being filled, the rich young ruler being sent empty away, the scattering of the proud Pharisees. Yes, yeah, that miraculous son of hers was a reflection. She had run that through the lens. She said, "Oh, this is a reflection. Jesus is a reflection of the God who had given her the gift of that son." And with her scripture and formed mind, she had spoken of the Lord's character and his works when she was a young woman, a very young woman. And now 30 years later, she's watching all of that in action in the person of Jesus. It must have been a delight. 

So what did she say about the Lord's character and work? Well, this is what she says in the song. First, she talks about his character and his humility and compassion. "For he has looked on the humble estate of his servant." It may be hard to grasp because we hold a person in the scriptures like Mary in very high esteem as Christians. We just do. But in the Roman Empire, there was probably nobody more insignificant than a person like Mary. She was just a nobody in the world. She was a very humble estate. She had no family connection, power, no connection to any kind of Roman world that would have helped her out. Like she just was a poor, insignificant person in the Roman Empire. If you were in the grocery store, she was one of those people that would just kind of walk by and wouldn't even remember anything. She was just Mary. So the Lord looked on the humble estate, this humble person who was poor and insignificant, but she was also humble before God because she recognized her own need for a Savior. She said, "my Savior," she needed that. The Lord looked down on her with compassion and when he sends his son, it's interesting that humility is the mark of Christ. Humility is his mark. He humbled himself taking the form of a man, Paul reminds us. So part of the character of the Lord is that he shows compassion on those who are insignificant in the world. 

And then he also shows strength. "He who is mighty has done great things for me." In giving her a son, what a mighty thing he did, and choosing her of all people in this pivotal point in human history, what a mighty thing, and even noticing her, what a mighty thing, he's shown strength with his arm. There is no question that the Lord rules over everything. Who else could do something like this or even think this up? So he's doing this. And of course, Jesus demonstrates this strength in all of his miracles that he performs, the strength of the Lord. He says, "holy, compassion, strength," and then holiness. "He says, and holy is his name." Who is like God? Who can do what he does? Who is righteous like him? Who here or who anywhere is without sin? And yet Mary watched her son become a man and live a life that was holy, a life without sin. And she does that in him. But here she proclaims, "Oh the Lord, he is holy." Holiness is a part of his character. 

And then she says, "and his mercy is for those who fear him from generation to generation." His mercy. God shows mercy. Why is mercy so important? We've talked about this before because the people are living in darkness. It's a world of sin. It's a world of misery. It's a world of brokenness. It's a world of oppression and enemies. It's a world that hates God and those associated with him. And our enemy the devil is always seeking to destroy and to distress and all that. We need God's mercy to deliver us, to save us, to comfort us in our distress, to see us in our sorrows, to act on our behalf. And Mary would watch again and again Jesus showing mercy to the weak and wounded, sick and sore. And she remembered that this all began when God showed mercy on her. And now he's showing mercy on the people of Israel, and it must have been a delight. And then covenant faithfulness. He says, "He has helped his servant Israel in remembrance of his mercy as he spoke to our fathers to Abraham and to his offspring forever." God's promise, covenant that he would be their God and they would be his people that began back with Abraham. It described a special relationship, a forever covenant. Those who are children of Abraham by faith continue to enjoy in Christ this special relationship with the Lord. We are his. He is our God. We are his people. Mary knew that her son was to be the one that Israel had hoped for, and she rejoiced in that here.

So that's the Lord's character. And then the Lord's work says that he has blessed her. This is his work. "For behold, from now on all generations will call me blessed." Mary believed Elizabeth when Elizabeth had said to her a little bit earlier that there would be a fulfillment of everything that was spoken to her by the Lord. And she knew that all generations would look back. She believed that her son would be the king and that all generations would look back on her, this insignificant person in the Roman Empire, and would call her blessed forever. What a great blessing. But I wonder, you know, she also says that she's blessed because "he who is mighty has done great things for me." I wonder if it goes beyond the birth of Christ because of course Mary would have known him beforehand. Maybe she's just thinking about her whole life. About how God has been gracious to her and kind, merciful and compassionate.

He blessed Mary and he also has helped Israel. He's brought salvation. And then his other works, he's brought down the mighty, sent away the rich, the proud. He's exalted and filled the humble and the hungry. He scatters the proud in their hearts. You know, Old Testament history has demonstrated again and again the truth of the things that Mary has talked about. Moses, David, Elisha, Daniel, Mordecai, Esther, insignificant in the world's eyes compared to people like Pharaoh and Goliath of the Philistines or the wicked king Ahab and his wicked queen Jezebel or the Babylonian emperor Belshazzar or the Persian royal official Haman. And in all those cases, the humble were lifted up and the proud were cast down. And so Mary knows, you know, what is the Roman Empire in all of its pomp in the eyes of God who rules? And for that matter, what's the American Empire in the eyes of God? What's the Russian Empire, the Chinese Empire, the Middle East madness in the eyes of God? What is it? Mary may seem insignificant. You may seem insignificant. God's people may seem insignificant. But Mary knows better and we should know better. The sovereign Lord uses the weak to shame the strong. He scatters the proud. He brings down the mighty. He exalts the humble and fills those who hunger and thirst after him. And it is God who raises kings and tears down kings. He is not impressed with a name like emperor or king in front of your first name. He's not impressed by that. He exalts the humble. He tears down the proud.

The Lord's work and character that Mary emphasizes in her words here and in her song are personal and relational, and they're also corporate. Rejoicing and praising the Lord is personal. She says and wholehearted, it's my soul. It's my spirit directed towards a personal savior, God, my savior. This is young Mary saying, "my God, my savior." And it's fully corporate because she also describes not only herself as a servant of God but says he's helped his servant Israel, his people who will be blessed forever through Christ and in a surprising way, you know, all the Gentiles will be brought in and so the church will grow over all the entire earth. He'll establish his church. Reminds us this personal and corporate aspect, the Lord's work and character remind us that God is both; he's transcended, he rules over everything. He's just powerful. He rules over all the nations and he orchestrates all these things and then at the same time he's imminent. He cares deeply about you personally. Everything that's on your heart that you care about, he cares about. His compassion and his humility and his kindness and his truth extend to each person even as he is ruling over everything, and that's your God. That's your God.

As a young pregnant woman, Mary saw the Lord's character and work and she responded with these words that we've read, the song that we're considering. I imagine that these words became even more of her perspective on life. Like if she went back to him every year or something like that, if she had written them down she might go and say, "yep, yep, oh yeah, definitely." And then when she started to see Jesus in action she must have gotten thrilled by these very same words as she saw the truth of them being worked out in the life of her son. And then she had to watch the tragedy of his death. She was able to witness and see the resurrection of her child and know that as he ascended into heaven she herself would receive God's spirit. And these words must have seemed more and more true. He brought down the mighty from their thrones. The humble were exalted. Christ was exalted so that his name is above all names, and she got to see it, embrace it. The very word she spoke more and more real.

And so we come to this today. We're the beneficiaries of the words that are recorded for us. And we also must respond to the Lord and his work in the world and in our lives. So there's many ways to respond, many things to think about, but I'd like to mention three for us because three seems like a good number. And so I'll constrain myself to three. Here they are.

First is repentance and faith. Think about the truth of who the Lord is and what he does. When the Lord looks on your estate this morning, he sees exactly who you are. Are you humble before him? I mean, it doesn't matter at all how insignificant you are in the eyes of the world or how insignificant someone else might have made you feel. It doesn't matter to the Lord. He's looking this morning. He sees you. Are you humble before him? Mary was. And it doesn't matter also what you've done in your past. Jesus came to save sinners of all types. The kingdom of God contains many a notorious sinner who has embraced the gospel, received the forgiveness of Christ, and now will live forever praising him. Do you look to him this morning for your sense of worth, for forgiveness of sin, for your daily needs, physical and spiritual? Do you look to him? Or as God looks on you this morning, does he see, does he find someone who thinks, "I'm actually pretty good? I don't really need a savior. I'm pretty well off. I don't really need God's help, but I'll call on him when I do." Today, brothers and sisters, in the midst of the great cares and burdens and joys and in the midst of your struggles against sin, sickness, weakness, loneliness, failure, not amounting to much, etc., etc., God looks on your estate. Rejoice that he's a God who looks on the estate of his people and is committed to their salvation. And that's a blessing. Think about that. Think about that. And our response, first and foremost, ought to be to repent of our sin in humility. Repentance is the mark of the Christian. To humble ourselves, to repent, and then just to believe the gospel. Place your faith in Christ. The blessings of God, Mary even comments here, are for those who fear the Lord, who fear him, who trust in him. So that's first, repentance and faith.

Second, continue to grow in your knowledge of the Lord. You know, Mary watched the Lord in action, I mean literally. But before Jesus was born, Mary knew the scriptures, the stories. They informed all of her thinking. Do you know the stories? Moses and Pharaoh, David and Goliath, Elisha and Ahab, Jesus and Herod, the apostles and the rulers of the Jews and the Gentiles, Jesus and his victory over Satan. Do you know all the stories? Do you know the Bible well? So that the Bible's words inform your perspective on the world. Not just in terms of, the Bible isn't a book that just wants to tell you what to do. It's not like a bureaucratic administrator code book from the government. It's the Bible. It's God's word. It doesn't want to just tell you what to do. It informs, it should teach us how we see everything. It informs everything in your life. Do you ask yourself that question as you read? If I believe this, how would this change my life? How would it change my perspectives? How would it change my actions? What would it do? I mean, these are questions that we should bring to the Scriptures as we grow in our love and knowledge of God and his word. Worship is an important part of this, growing as a Christian, being a faithful Christian. It's in worship that we regularly remember the Lord and his work where we proclaim and where we sing his praise. So grow in your knowledge of the Lord and his work so that your whole life will be Scripture informed. You don't know what tomorrow is going to bring. You have no idea. We all think we have an idea, but we don't. Have a Scripture informed life so that when the trouble comes, when the trials arrive, you're not tossed by the waves. We're seeking the best answer for my problem has to be on the Internet because your life has been informed by God's word.

And then third and finally, as we grow in our knowledge of the Lord and his work, we ought to continue to grow in trusting the Lord. Look here's what I mean. Here by way of example, I'll give one characteristic, the mercy of God that Mary speaks of. Let's just look briefly at the mercy of God. God's promise here that's just declared for us is that God's mercy is for generation after generation and that the foundation of that mercy is God's promises and the expression of that mercy that we can see is the person and work of Christ. So we see the mercy in action, the foundation of the mercy is God's promise of mercy, and then God just shows mercy from generation to generation. Our response, seeing and thinking about that mercy, should be, boy, I'm going to trust the Lord. That's awesome. Because when we do that, you see, we receive the comfort that Christians have access to as those who trust the Lord. Look to parents. God's mercy means that he will not abandon your children. He's a covenant God and he works generationally. He doesn't see us as a loosely connected organization of individual believers. He sees us together as families and then as a congregation, as a church, as a body. He cares for the prodigal son. He cares for those who you care about. He cares for you. His mercy declares that. So you can trust him in that. To children, every child who's here, God's mercy means that he has made promises to his people. He promises you eternal life and forgiveness and blessing and real joy if you'll receive him by faith. That's every child. And you can thank the Lord that he's placed you in a Christian home and looked to grow in the faith that your parents are teaching you. Find comfort in the fact that God looked on you in a special way. He's going to call you to work in his kingdom. Every child. So follow him with your whole heart, mind, soul, strength. You can trust him. You can trust God. To all of us as Christians, God's promises are for each of us in Christ.  The God who Mary proclaims as faithful and merciful will be faithful and merciful to you. That's a great comfort in whatever we face as we can throughout our lives. So grow in trusting the Lord. You can see how his character, if we believe it, if we hold, if we know it, first of all, because we're scripture informed, but then if we hold on to it, we grow in trusting the Lord. There's great comfort and strength and stability.

There was a day. There's your three. There was a day in history when Mary, pregnant with Jesus, the son of God, proclaimed that God is a God who sees, who is Lord and savior, who is mighty and holy and filled with compassion and loving kindness. This young pregnant woman proclaimed that he is a God who blesses and helps and raises up kings and tears down the proud and lifts up the humble. And she, like the rest of the disciples, would learn that part of God's plan of salvation was that her dear son, she would watch him be brutally killed on the cross. But his willingness to do that made Mary's song from so many years before true in deeper ways than Mary herself could ever anticipate.

So today a great joy is proclaimed to us again. Jesus Christ, son of God and son of man, the child of Mary, died for sinners like you and like me. Mary sang these words before us today. I think about those blind men. What would those blind men have sung? Maybe something like "Amazing Grace," right? "Who's blind but now I see." Maybe they would extend it further. "Those who thought they could see, God has made blind. The proud he's brought down, the humble he's lifted up." What is your song? What do you sing? Does your soul magnify the Lord and your spirit rejoice in God your Savior? What's your song? Because the day is coming when Christ will return and his reign will be fully and finally established, and then that's when the singing will begin. For real. The basses will sing of the creation and the glory of God who shines the light in the darkness and the booming notes of God's power and strength, and the tenors and the altos will support the song with the harmonies of God's kindness and mercy and compassion of truth and holiness and righteousness, and the sopranos will hit all the high notes. The melody that goes on, praise to the king, praise to Jesus. Born a child and yet a king, praise to the one who lived and died and rose again, praise to the one who defeated death, praise to the one who gives life to all his people in the song. It will go on until all of creation and heaven and earth, a sound that would kill us if we heard it. All of creation. It will swell in glory and the voices will proclaim to him who sits on the throne and unto the lamb, be blessing and honor and glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

Let's pray.