# The Kings Parables

## Rev. Don Dove

Good morning. If you're visiting with us today, we've been walking as a congregation through the Gospel of Matthew. We all can turn there this morning to Matthew 21. And it's the story of Jesus, his works and his words. And the first 2/3 of the book that we walk through together described for us the beginnings of Jesus's ministry and then the teaching and healing and miracles that he performed over the course of three years in and around the Sea of Galilee. And in some ways, this beginning 2/3 is kind of the happy part of the story. Jesus is doing wonderful things among the people. He's healing people. The crowds are coming to listen to him. They're marveling at his teaching, they're bringing people to him. And there's some opposition, to be sure, but it's largely sort of from local folk. And the central action of his ministry was not so much about dealing with their challenges as teaching about what it means that the kingdom of God has come and, and what kind of king he was and what it means to be a person who believes in him and the importance of following him. So he's teaching all these things.

But the last part of the book that we're in now, it's a bit heavier. The delight and wonder of the beginning of the ministry now turns to the attention of Matthew, turns towards the final week of Jesus' life and his heading to the cross. It began as he comes into Jerusalem triumphantly here, having traveled there to celebrate the Passover with friends and family and a wide variety of people from the Galilean region. They come and support him and hosanna. Here's the king, the Son and the Son of David. And so he enters in. The roads are packed. The city is absolutely just packed with people for this celebration. This was the heart of the Jewish year. Everybody would try to make this pilgrimage. And news of Jesus coming stirred up some of the people in the city. And now there's beginning to be some noise created. The religious officials have heard that Jesus is in town and are in the city and they are going to come and they're going to check him out.

And last week, what we saw was Jesus coming as the king, into his house, into the temple, and clearing out the mess. His house is to be a house of prayer, of humility, of healing, of kindness. And it had become just a place of convenient economics, of rebellion, of cold formalism. And so he asserts his authority. He asserts his authority over the temple. He asserts his authority, authority over the authorities. He asserts his authority over creation. In this encounter with a fig tree that isn't bearing fruit, even though it should. And he's just asserting his authority, even hints actually that that authority is going to be shared by his disciples when they pray in his name. You know, he gives that promise about. About that.

And today he's back in the temple. He's had this question, asked him about, you know, by what authority do you do the things that you do? And he's responded to that. We talked about that last week. He asked them, well, by what authority did John the Baptist come baptizing? And they. They get all bent out of shape about not being able to answer that question. So he tells them, well, I'm not going to answer your question either, asserting his authority over them. And that's we're going to pick up today. He's interacting with these religious leaders, and he goes from sort of a direct confrontation to telling three stories, three parables. And will will consider them. These parables would have been told in the hearing, not only of these religious leaders, but in the hearing of the disciples and the crowds. And today in our hearing.

So this is the word of the Lord, beginning at verse 28 of Matthew 21. Jesus is speaking.

> "So what do you think? A man had two sons, and he went to the first and he said, "Son, go and work in the vineyard today." And he answered, "I will not." But afterward he changed his mind, and he went. And he went to the other son and said the same. And he answered, "I go, sir," but did not go. Which of the two did the will of the father? And they said, "Well, the first." Jesus said to them, "Truly I say to you, the tax collectors and the prostitutes go into the kingdom of God before you. For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. And even when you saw it, you did not afterward change your minds and believe him."
Here, another parable. There was a master of a house who planted a vineyard and put a fence around it, and he dug a winepress in it and built a tower, and leased it to tenants and went into another country. When the season for fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the tenants to get his fruit. And the tenants took his servants and beat one, killed another and stoned another. Again he sent other servants, more than the first, and they did the same to them. Finally, he sent his son to them, saying, "They will respect my son." But when the tenants saw the son, they said to themselves, "This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and have his inheritance." And they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. When, therefore, the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants? And they said to him, "Well, he'll put those wretches to a miserable death. And he'll let out the vineyard to other tenants who will give him the fruits in their due season." Jesus said to them, "Have you never read in the Scriptures: 'The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone; this was the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes'? Therefore, I tell you, the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people producing its fruits. And the one who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces; and when it falls on anyone, it will crush him."
Now, when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they perceived that he was speaking about them. And although they were seeking to arrest him, they feared the crowds because they held him to be a prophet.
And again Jesus spoke to them in parables, saying, "The kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who gave a wedding feast for his son. And he sent his servants to call those who were invited to the wedding feast, but they wouldn't come. Again he sent other servants, saying, 'Tell those who are invited, "See, I have prepared my dinner, my oxen and my fat calves have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding feast."' But they paid no attention and went off, one to his farm, another to his business, while the rest seized his servants, treated them shamefully, and killed them. The king was angry, and he sent his troops and destroyed those murderers and burned their city. Then he said to his servants, 'The wedding feast is ready, but those invited were not worthy. Go therefore to the main roads and invite to the wedding feast as many as you find.' And those servants went out into the roads and gathered all whom they found, both bad and good. So the wedding hall was filled with guests. But when the king came in to look at the guests, he saw there was a man who had no wedding garment. And he said to him, 'Friend, how did you get in here without a wedding garment?' And he was speechless. Then the king said to the attendants, 'Bind him hand and foot and cast him into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.' For many are called, but few are chosen."

This is the word of the Lord.

This morning, Jesus begins with a parable. It's a parable about a family operation, a little vineyard. And a story about two sons, what is it? What's the need? Well, the need is that the two sons would go out and do their chores. They'd get out into the vineyard and do the work that needs to be done. And Jesus says that the first son, he just won't go. He says to his dad, "No, I'm not doing that." But after a while, he changes his mind and he repents, essentially, and he goes and he does the father's will. The second son is very respectful. So he respectfully tells his father that he will go. He says, "Right, here I go, sir." And then he just doesn't. And Jesus asks, finishes that story. He asks. He says, "Well, which one of the sons did the father's will?" He's asking the religious leaders. And they said, "Well, clearly it's the first son, the one who actually went out and did the thing that the father had asked him to do." And so then Jesus makes a point. He says, "Well, the first son, it's like the tax collectors and the prostitutes." So he sort of lays that out there. Those who would have been seen as kind of the unrighteous sinners in their culture and at that time, and they had made clear, of course, by their lives of prostitution and extortion that their intention was not to follow the Father's will. Those things aren't good things. And so they had made their mind up that they weren't going to follow what the Father would desire them to do. But upon hearing the teaching of John the Baptist, who came, Jesus says, in the way of righteousness, they repented and they turned to the Lord. So here's the first son. Their lives reflective of people who just have no interest at all in God or in his ways. And yet upon hearing the teaching, they repent and they turn to the Lord.

Now, the second son is like the religious leaders, with great formalism, scrupulous commitment to the law. They say to the Father, "We're with you. We go, sir." But when John comes preaching the truth of the gospel, they don't believe him. And even when they see sinners turning and repenting and the marvelous things that Jesus is doing, they don't believe him. They refuse to go in the place where the Father is taking the world but taking his people, they refused to repent. They refused to go.

Well, what was this teaching? What was this teaching of John that was turning sinners to God? What was this teaching that the religious leaders refused to believe? Well, the teaching of John is, we've seen, is that the kingdom of God had come and that the people, religious leaders included, all the people. What they needed to do was to repent of their sin and turn to God and particularly to follow the Messiah who was to come, the Lamb of God, who John understood to be Jesus. His message, John's message was that Jesus was the Christ, the King, the one with true authority from God, and that people should turn from their sin and follow him. And if you want to be doing the Father's will, that's the order of events, you would be following Jesus and not opposing him. So there it is, he tells this story. And I mean, I think there's a couple things for us to think about here. We ought to consider first as we look at this parable, a truth of what does not matter with respect to whether or not you will be a part of Christ's kingdom. Here is what doesn't matter. Your past sins.

Your past sins don't matter. Jesus is saying that those who are in the kingdom of God were the prostitutes and the tax collectors, the lowest of the low in his day. The scripture's proclamation is that all of us are sinners. We all do the things that we shouldn't do. We don't do the things that we should. In God's sight, we all deserve condemnation by God. No one is willing to go out into the vineyard for real and work. But his grace is such that this message, when believed, transfers us from the domain of darkness, of life without God, into the kingdom of God. Jesus' kingdom. The gospel has always been and was held out to the worst of sinners and also to those who appeared righteous. But it was the sinners who rejoiced. The self-righteous became angry and they rejected Jesus. So our past sins don't keep us from the kingdom. And that's good news because all of us have past sins. But those things don't keep us from the kingdom. If anything, they should drive us rejoicing into the kingdom because Christ will receive sinners like us.

And secondly, we ought to consider our present call, you know, because today the call is given to you. The Father is asking each one of us to work in his kingdom and in his vineyard. So what will it be? If we're to be a part of his kingdom, then we must repent of our sin, repent of saying no to the Father in every case. And we must believe the message of the gospel that he has given us, that John began to preach. We must place our faith and our hope in Christ alone for salvation and follow him to work for Christ in His kingdom. So it's always good to ask how we respond to his present call today for us, will we repent and believe again and again the gospel of Christ?

The religious leaders, I think at this point in Jesus's dialogue may have been a bit taken back by the story, you know, like. Like, who is this guy? He's showing us some disrespect, you know, the teacher has just. This teacher, this Jesus has just suggested that prostitutes and tax collectors are actually in a better condition than they are. And what an offense. What an offense. But Jesus, of course, isn't done. And he tells them another parable.

Here's the continuation of the transcription:

I had the privilege a while ago of doing a wedding in Northern California. And the bride's father was an owner of an extensive olive grove, very large olive grove. And much help was required to manage and produce and try to maximize the profit for the fruit that was there. And what we see in Jesus' second story is what occurs in a place such as that, except it's grapes instead of olives. The story is about some tenants in a very large vineyard, expansive, and a wealthy man. It would have been a common occurrence. The wealthy would set up sort of an agricultural complex. And then the tenants were expected to work the land, maximize it, make it profitable, and then they would share in that. They'd have a place to live and food to eat. It was an arrangement. And in this parable, though, it just. It goes all wrong.

So I wanted just to note a couple of things. One is that the master only has one objective. You'll see that the objective of the master is singular, and that is fruit. He wants fruit. He wants fruitfulness. He wants them to do their job, to produce fruit. And you also notice that the provision of the master. So he planted the vineyard and he set up the winepress, and he added all the appropriate protection, the fences that were around it, the tower, to sort of take a look at everything from higher up. And he even knew that it would take some time for the vines to grow several years. And so presumably he provided the resources that the tenants would need to manage that over a period of time. And finally it comes time to when he needs to collect the fruit. This is standard.

So Jesus is telling me this story, you know, it's this story about a vineyard and some tenants in a vineyard. Everybody's just sort of listening in and probably thinking about, like the vineyard that, you know, they maybe passed on the road on the way up to Jerusalem and thinking about the people that worked. Maybe some of the crowd were tenants, maybe some of the wealthier, like the chief priests. Maybe they had farms on the outside. So they were envisioning this picture. And one can imagine Jesus sort of telling this parable when everybody's sort of expecting the parable to go. Go in sort of a direction of like. And he came and there was sort of fruitfulness or maybe, you know, something positive, a little positive story. But. But instead what happens is it takes this incredibly, like, dark turn. And it must have been sort of shocking, intentionally so to anybody who was listening to the story at the time.

So here they are. They. Everybody's doing normal things. The owner's providing, the tenants are tenanting and growing their stuff. And then the time comes for the collection, and we see just the absolute wickedness of the tenants. So the master comes and he presents servants to them. And it doesn't even go to, like, you know, well, they said, oh, the fruit isn't ready. And they tried to sort of, you know, it wasn't like that. Instead, Jesus tells the story and he says, well, the tenant sends the. Or the. The master sends some servants and. And then when they get there, the tenants beat and kill them. It's like, what. So there's this brutal treatment over the top of this. People who are doing their job. So. So they come and. And the master's like, well, what in the world? So he sends some more. And like, they. They do the same thing. Thing. And. And so he's shocked, right? So. So the master says, well, you know, I don't know what's going wrong here, but what I'll do is I'll send my son because at least they'll respect my son. And the tenants with their. With. Then what they do is they. They go and they. They kill the son and they chuck him out of the vineyard, you know, to rot. This was the tenants and their minds, driven crazy by sin, actually came up with some confused logic that thought that by killing the heir, they would become the ones who would rule over the vineyard. And in their wickedness, what they forgot was that the vineyard actually had an owner.

So after telling the story, you know, in this fashion, Jesus asks the religious leaders, well, what do you think the owner should do? Well, the religious leaders, you know, their moral compass is like, on fire. You know, they even get a little bit angry. And it says that the sensibilities, they declare that the owner of the vineyard. That the owner of the vineyard. What the owner of the vineyard should do and ought to do is come and just kill all those wretches and give the vineyard to somebody who's going to do their job, you know, they got the answer right. And then Jesus then quotes Psalm 118. He says, you know, have you ever read in the Scriptures that part where it says that the stone that the builders rejected, it became the chief cornerstone? He's declaring that they are the tenants and they've just condemned themselves. And they perceived, the Bible says they perceived that he was speaking about them. And they're angry. And so they want to arrest him, but they're also afraid.

Jesus is basically saying that the only fruit that could be found among the religious leaders was the fruit of rejection and rebellion and hatred for God and his ways and his Son. And as a result, the kingdom would be taken away from them and that they would be crushed and the kingdom would be given to those who would accomplish the Master's objectives, who would bear fruit. And so that brings us to us this morning, because you see, as Christians, we are the new vineyard tenants and are expected to bear fruit. Jesus came and removed the religious leaders from authority. That's what he did in AD 70. The temple would be destroyed and all vestiges of their power would be completely undone. But the kingdom wasn't destroyed. Jerusalem could be burned to the ground by the Romans, but the kingdom wasn't destroyed. The vineyard was still fully operational. Jesus would say, "I am the vine and you are the branches." All those who are connected to Christ, who believe are expected to bear fruit. And this is the question we must ask ourselves.

We have been, by God's grace, given the kingdom as a gift, but we're not just entering into the kingdom and waiting and doing nothing. We're expected to work, to bear fruit. What kind of fruit does the Bible expect you and I to bear? Well, there's personally, we're to bear love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control. That will come along maybe with a lot of suffering. Christ also suffered. But that's the fruit that you are called to bear in your life. That's what each Christian's life should look more and more like. Love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, gentleness, goodness, self-control, faithfulness. And he also expects fruit that expands into a congregation, into his church, among his people, a corporate fruit. It's described like this in the Bible, that we would be a people who would pray for one another, who would be generous towards each other, who would forgive one another, who would love one another, who would encourage one another, who would meet together in worship, and so on. It may involve a great deal of suffering. Christ suffered. But the fruit that he expects us to bear, those are our fruits. So that's the question. I mean, are you bearing fruit? Look, look. In this lies the proof as to whether one is a Christian or not. The fruit is the proof. These aren't words that we, that we. That we said at some point in time. The fruit is the proof. What. What kind of fruit are you bearing?

Second, though we should also be thankful that we're not expected to do something we cannot do, we should understand that even as the Master provided all that was needed in that story for the vineyard to be productive, our Master has provided for us everything that we need in. In order for us to bear the fruit that he wants us to bear. We have everything that we need for that. He's provided us with forgiveness of sin in Christ and reconciliation with Himself. And then he's poured out His Holy Spirit on his people, and he's given us gifts and talents to use in the work that he calls us to do. So we ought to give thanks for that truth always. He doesn't tell us to go work and then give us no tools to do, to do that with. He provides us with everything that we need. Are we bearing fruit? Are we grateful for the provision of God?

Now that Jesus has thoroughly hacked off the Pharisees and the chief priests, which he has done at this point in time in his storytelling, they are mad. They want him to be arrested. They're afraid of the crowds. So that doesn't happen at this point. But Jesus decides that, like, it's time to speak to them again. And he wants to tell them about a wedding, some sweet, right? Wedding. It's a story about weddings. Everybody's familiar. We have now lots of weddings that go on. And the more recent invention, I think maybe it's one that existed and now has come back. But you have, like, save the dates now, right? Because there's a lot of weddings, a lot of things happening in people's lives. So they give you a save the date. So even before the RSVP, the formal invitation, you know well in advance that this wedding is coming. And so you have your save the date, and then you get the formal invitation and the request for you to RSVP. And you can do that now online in most cases. So they give you these. There's all of this that you can now do to let somebody know that you are coming to their wedding. And so most of us that, you know, if we're able to do that, we're going to do that, participate. It's a happy event, a joyful event. We're excited about it generally, glad for the people. But what if on the day before the wedding you find that everyone who RSVP'd, you know, here you are, it's your day, and your day is approaching and all of a sudden the day before you find out that everybody who RSVP'd is backing out. And they're not only backing out because of like, you know, I don't know, war has hit their area of the country. They're backing out because they just got other stuff to do or a variety of other lame sauce reasons that they come up with. I mean, what a devastating blow to the bride. In that case, I want a devastating blow to the parents. Right, who helped you prepare the list of the people to invite to the wedding and they thought that this was going to be just a glorious occasion and then nobody comes.

That's the parable. There's a king, you know, I mean, he's super excited. He's excited about a wedding feast for his son. And he's invited many of the nobles and the leaders from all around his kingdom to come. It would be in the day, you know, weddings, you didn't cram them in to like a three-hour event. It would be like a week-long festival. A week-long festival. A week-long celebration. Don't anybody get any ideas. And it would be a privilege beyond privilege to be invited to the king's feast of his son. And maybe those who are listening to Jesus are thinking about a lovely royal wedding and all the regalia and all of the. Just the beauty of it all. And then Jesus, there's this like dark turn to the story. Here's this great wedding feast. He even talks about it a little bit, you know, everything is prepared. There is delicious food that's been prepared for the people and certainly one could expect a grand ceremony and music and entertainment for all. And so the king sends out the servants, he knows that they're all going to be coming and he sends out the servants, come to the feast. The time has come. But for some reason nobody shows up. And I mean the master must have thought to himself, like, must be, there's got to be some mistake. So something went wrong in the communication. Let me send out my servants again. So he does it and come to the feast. He tells them, you know, everything is, everything is ready. Tell them everything, all that's going to be happening. Tell them to come. But this time we're told that there's like a wide variety of responses, from sheer apathy to pretending like they had something more important to do to even this. Kind of like someone comes to tell you it's time for the wedding and you kill them. Okay, so there's this violent mistreatment of these poor servants of the king. And those who have been invited, you see, paid no attention to the king. They didn't care about the king or the king's son. They paid some attention to his servants in that they killed him or ignored them. And so the king in his anger, this is sort of part of what's going on. These people are listening to this story, you know, they think of the wedding feast and then it says that the king in his anger sends in his army and he destroys all the murderers and tears down their city.

All right, but his son's still getting married. So now the king's got a build up the feast again. And, and he does that. The feast is still ready. So this time we're just going to call everyone, he says, good people, bad people, all people, everybody can come to the feast. Any one of the servants can find. And so surprised and maybe excited, you know, the, the wedding hall is now filled with all these regular people who are invited to the feast. But there's just one person. The king comes in and he sees this person who's either snuck in through a side door or meandered in past the guards, and he's just inappropriately dressed. I mean, it's a wedding for a king. I mean, he came to the feast, but he was just like these other people. He shouldn't. No honor at all to the king. And so the Bible says that he's thrown out into the outer darkness. And Jesus summarizes the message of the parable. He says, you know, many are called, but few are chosen.

The religious leaders know that once again they're being cast in the most negative of lights. They see it that they are the murderous, apathetic, rebellious subjects. In this parable, there are those who are invited to the feast, but who don't care about the king and don't care about his son. They see that Jesus is again proclaiming that their authority is about to end and that their rejection of the Lord's invitation to the wedding feast of his son will go poorly. That they will be upended, that they will be judged, that they will be destroyed. That was upsetting to them. It made them angry at Jesus for saying such a thing. And instead of the powerful religious authorities being called to enjoy the feast, the call would become universal that all men, Jews, Gentiles from all over the world, those who are in the crowd listening to Jesus. They're all being called to this feast. And yet the universal nature of the call means that some are going to enter into the place of the feast without any concern still for the king's honor. They're going to be inappropriately dressed so that the number chosen, those who will enjoy the feast, is going to be less than the number who were called or invited to be a part of that feast. Have you thought about that? You've been invited to the feast of a king. It is the gracious universal call of the gospel that regular people, people like you, people like me, people of no nobility at all, have been invited into the glorious feast of the king of all things. I mean, what, what a privilege to be invited to this feast. So, so, so how do you respond to that? I mean, will you be one of those who hear the gospel, reject it entirely, or mistreat or ignore those who bring you the message? Much of the world operates just like that. There is little interest or no interest in the king or in his son, or in the gospel or in any of it. And yet the scriptures teach, one day every person's going to stand before the judgment seat of God. Every person here is going to stand before the judgment seat of God. What are we going to say? I'm sorry I rejected the gospel. I had work to do. I'm sorry I rejected your gracious call to me. I had some possessions I really wanted to acquire, or I just. I didn't really have time to think about it. I was spending so much time trying to make my life happy that I didn't really listen to you. I mean, what are we going to say? We be like those initial guests who just didn't come because they thought they had something better to do and they hated the people who asked them. Of course you ought to come, right? But maybe you can hear that call and maybe I think this is hard sometime for those who grow up in the church. You can hear that call and you can hang around kind of all your life around Christians and around the church, but you never really have the right wedding clothes on. Your desire is never really to honor the king or never to love the son or never to really follow him. I mean, tons of teenagers who grow up in Christian homes describe it just like that, wanting to have their Christian faith be something that is their own. And that's right, because if we're just here at church, at the feast, but not in wedding clothes, we're in a bad position. Even as the inappropriately dressed man was. See, we've got to come to faith in Christ. You have to see that like the invitation to you is a glorious invitation. And it is as to you. So what will you wear to the wedding? I mean, the Bible describes the Christian as one who is dressed in the righteousness of Christ, who puts on Christ. In other words, we don't come dressed just trying to please God with our own stuff outside of Jesus. But the Bible also describes our wedding clothes as being dressed the clothing of a righteous life. The apostle Paul says it like this. He says, put on then as God's chosen ones, as those who have been called by him and who embrace Him. Put on these clothes. He says, put on as God's chosen ones, holy and beloved, compassionate hearts, kindness, humility, meekness and patience bearing with each other. And if one has a complaint against another, forgiving each other, as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive. And above all these, put on love. Put on love which binds everything together in perfect harmony. It is these kinds of wedding clothes that bring honor to God. That when he looks and he sees his people dressed in the righteousness of His Son and dressed in the ways that His Son lives, it's pleasing to him. It brings honor to him. It says, we want to do just. We want to be just like you. Are those the clothes that you're wearing today?

So Jesus concludes his stories. The tension between Jesus and the religious leaders in Jerusalem has bubbled over. Jesus is no longer just an irritant. He is officially trouble. And we'll see that they want to have him removed. But the thing is, Matthew didn't write this just so we would know what happened. Although it tells us what happened. These stories are here for us to hear and to respond to. So friends, here are the warnings that are here today. There's a warning against rebellion and against apathy and against unbelief. These powerful men thought that their self-righteousness would carry them through. But God was not impressed. He's not impressed with self-righteousness. Instead of trusting in anything of our own, instead of living a life of sinful indulgence, of ignoring God, of caring only about myself, of thinking too highly of myself. Scripture today says that we ought to run to Christ our King. May we repent of our sin, follow him daily with our whole heart, mind, soul and strength. And may we glorify our God in doing so and enjoy him forever. Because he's the master of the feast and he's the owner of the vineyard, and he's the King of us all. Let's pray.
