Well, you can turn with me this morning to Matthew chapter 8. We're going to be looking at verses 23 through 27. We've been looking at the Gospel of Matthew for a while, the story of Jesus. And last week, what we did was we considered what it means to actually follow Jesus. We saw that there are so many good reasons to follow Jesus, including such things as the promise of forgiveness of sin, the promise that you will never die, but that you will live forever—great promises. And so a lot of people will make a decision to follow Jesus. But we saw and thought about that idea that making a decision to follow Him and following Him are two very different things. Jesus spoke of how following Him will mean a total commitment. He must always be number one, and how following Him will not be easy. There'll be a time for peace and rest, but that time isn't now. It will be hard. It will require a lot of us. Following Jesus isn't just adding a little religion onto a decent moral life. It is an acknowledgment that we are not the leader, that we need Christ's leading. We need His forgiveness. We need Him.

In Matthew's gospel, Jesus was preparing to get into a boat and cross the sea or the Lake of Galilee, where He had been ministering to the people of Capernaum, and He was going to head over to the other side to minister there. And as He was doing that, these two men, a scribe and then one of His disciples, had come up to Him, and they had interacted with Him about these things, about what does it mean to follow Him. And now these interactions are over. Jesus continues on His journey, and He gets into a boat, and He begins to cross the sea. And so we'll read about that now, and then we're going to consider a great storm and a great calm and a great Savior. Hear the word of the Lord.

And when He got into the boat, His disciples followed Him. And behold, there arose a great storm on the sea, so that the boat was being swamped by the waves, but He was asleep. And they went and they woke Him, saying, “Save us, Lord. We're perishing.” And He said to them, “Why are you afraid, O you of little faith?” Then He rose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm. And the men marveled, saying, “What sort of man is this, that even winds and sea obey Him?”

This is the word of the Lord this morning. I remember as a small child, kind of the first several times that I had to ride on an escalator by myself. Now, when I was young, that was sort of like the new hot thing. You could have a second floor to a department store, and to get there, you rode up an escalator. And of course, since they were relatively new, as we do in our culture, we were warned very, very often about the great dangers of escalators, which largely were about shoelaces. Those of you who are a little older recall this. And the shoelace thing was, you've got this image in your mind of hundreds of children being swallowed by escalators. As their shoelaces got caught, their feet ripped off their bodies. And so naturally, as a child, having heard some of these stories, there was a great deal of fear when finally I was no longer with my parents' hand holding mine, but it was the first times I had to choose to actually take that step onto the escalator. Some of you may remember that particular fear. It was certainly one I had. I was scared. But I also knew that following my parents meant that I had to step on the escalator; otherwise, they would sort of disappear into the distance over the top and to the second floor. And so I learned to do that. There was no other way to follow them than to go where they went.

Following Jesus meant getting into the boat with him. The disciples had to do that. Whatever apprehensions or doubts anyone might have, if they wanted to follow him, they had to go where he went. They had to get into the boat in this case. By doing that, it meant that they were going to go somewhere. Jesus takes people places. He's going to go somewhere. It was about a 2 and 1/2-hour journey across this lake. And they were going to go there together. Who was with him? It says that his disciples followed him. You see, there was all this talk about following, and now following's happening in the Bible. We're introduced to what this looks like. So Jesus says, OK, you're going to follow me, get into the boat, and they all get in the boat. Maybe not all of them, of course. This would be enough disciples to fill a boat. Probably his closest ones, at least some of the 12 that we become familiar with as we read the Gospels. These were the men who were following him. They got into the boat. It was not a Princess Cruz boat. It was a fishing boat, a large fishing boat to accommodate big nets and large catches. Probably could uncomfortably fit maybe 10 to 15 people. We don't know the names of the people who were with him, the disciples. We just know they were following him, and they followed him into the boat. So these men are there with Jesus, and Jesus goes asleep.

When we follow Jesus, what we talked about last week, is that you follow him into trouble. Jesus's life, as awesome as it would have been to see all these incredible things that he did, it ended his life in the cross. That's where he was heading. That's where the journey headed at the end. And then, of course, the awesome resurrection. But the cross had to precede that. Jesus takes them into the boat, and trouble follows shortly thereafter. A great storm on the sea. Behold, there arose a great storm on the sea. It's a violent storm. This particular lake, and the reading which I did, it's quite common even to this day. For these great storms that just arise out of nowhere, right in the middle of this lake, this sea. So a great storm arises so that the boat was being swamped by the waves. That's the picture, Matthew's drawing. For those who are reading this gospel, the Jews of Matthew's day, and readers of the scriptures today, this incident would call to mind multiple incidents in the Old Testament. It's meant to do that. We're meant to be reminded of Noah in his boat, and the flood. We're meant to be reminded of Israel, and the parting of the sea. How are they going to get through? We're meant to be reminded of Jonah in a boat with some sailors, and a wild storm that's happening. We're meant to be reminded of these cosmic pictures of the sea monster Leviathan, and the sea as a picture of darkness, and chaos, and the forces of evil. We're meant to be reminded of these things as we picture the disciples on this boat in a storm. The waves crashing in.

And then there's a psalm. It's Psalm 107. In this psalm, we hear of a similar incident at sea as the psalmist recounts the experience of some men in that time. And this is what he says. Some went down to the sea and ships, doing business on the great waters. They saw the deeds of the Lord, his wondrous works in the deep. For he commanded and he raised the stormy wind, which lifted up the waves of the sea. They mounted up to heaven. They went down to the depths. And their courage melted away in their evil plight. They reeled and staggered like drunken men and were at their wits' end. That which provided food and a source of revenue could be stirred up so that the professionals, the sailors, were completely out of their league. Their courage melting away, reeling, staggering, the Bible says. And the psalm then continues. It says, then they cried out to the Lord in their trouble. And that's what the disciples did. Jesus was sleeping. And they go and they wake him up. And they say, save us, Lord. We're perishing. What did they expect him to do? Jesus was no more of a fisherman than most of us in this room. It wasn't his trade. What did they expect him to do? Did they want him to help bail water? Start pulling his weight here, stop sleeping, start pulling? Did they want him to ask God for some help to survive? Maybe they knew that through his teaching and his healing that he had obviously a connection with God that was greater than their own. And so maybe Jesus' prayers would be more effective. Did they just know that he was more powerful than they were? And who knows, maybe he could work something out. So they cry out, Lord, we're perishing. Were they upset? Why is Jesus sleeping while this great storm threatens to destroy us? And he's sleeping in the boat. We're not told. We just see them desperate. And in their desperation, they turn to Jesus. They went and they woke him saying, save us, Lord. We are perishing.

Do you ever think that Jesus is sleeping in the boat? I mean, your troubles are significant, things that are happening in your life, great storms. Do you ever begin to wonder if anyone's in control of all that? Because you know you aren't. Are we all just being driven randomly by circumstances outside of our control? Does God care? Or maybe you know, like you don't want to say, oh, God doesn't care. You know he generally cares for you. But in this particular instance, he's not really paying attention to your troubles right now. Maybe he needs to be shaken

, woken up, so he can hear me a little better. Following Jesus does not end your problems. But you're in the boat with Jesus. Or better, he's in the boat with you. That would mean a whole lot. It wouldn't mean a whole lot if the best he could do is offer you good advice and chicken soup for your soul, offer a little help, a helping hand. Because the waves, they swamp. Sin, our sin leads to death. Death. Bailing water doesn't stop death. Trying to be a better person doesn't do that. Just Jesus telling you to be better wouldn't do anything. Troubles, all your troubles, they tend to lead us to despair. Troubles lead us to despair. If Jesus just was trying to be cheery, you would be irritated at him. In the same way that sometimes my wife gets irritated at me in the way that I handle her illness. Cheer up. Nobody wants to hear that. Troubles can lead to despair. And then there's the darkness of the world, the trinkets, the distractions, all that's leading. As Jesus has said earlier, a highway, a pathway to destruction. A few happy words, a helping hand, can that stop any of that? You see, that's why we can't be in control of anything. We have to remember that we did not invite Jesus into our hearts. Jesus invited you to follow him. He invited you to follow him. And so there's no place for frustration that he's not helping to bail us out of our troubles. He's following him. And we find ourselves in the boat in our troubles.

Jesus brought the disciples into the great storm. And he's going to bring them out. He brought the disciples into the great storm so that they might see something about him. That they might see him, bring them through it, and to the other side. And he does the same thing with us. The disciples wake Jesus. They plead, save us, Lord. We're perishing. And Jesus wakes up. And in great dramatic fashion, no, actually, only in the movies would it be dramatic. Actually, what he does is he wakes up. He stirs. And he asks them a question. Can you imagine? Like, they think they're dying. And they're experienced fishermen. They know what they're doing. They're thinking the boat is going to the bottom of the sea. We've got to wake up Jesus, save us, we're perishing. And he gets up and he asks them a question. Like it's school. Why are you afraid, oh you of little faith?

You know, most children at some point, and maybe there's some children here who are, most children at some point are afraid of the dark. Some adults are too, but that's a problem. Most children are afraid of the dark. One of my kids was particularly afraid. And this child would often appear, oh, I don't know, at 2 AM. I would sort of kind of feel the presence. And I'd wake up and there standing right next to the bed was the child. And I would then go with this child to their room and sit there until everything was well and the child was comforted. He could go back to sleep. Nothing changed. Whatever they were afraid of under the bed or in the closet that had the beady red eyes and was giant. All of a sudden, I mean, presumably all that was still there. It's just that what somehow knowing that the creature had to go through dad first was comforting. Isn't that funny? Like they created this kind of awesome, terrifying image in their mind, but then just putting dad in front of it made it like, well, it couldn't beat him, which of course, yeah. Fear gave way to faith. The child trusted that whatever they were afraid of, I would be able to sort of just kind of keep it at bay. Somehow in their minds, that's what they think. It's OK. Fear gave way to faith.

Jesus is awakened in the middle of this great storm, and his response to the disciples' plea is, I imagine, not exactly what they expected. But it's a probing question, and it's an important question. And it's this. Why are you afraid? And he'd ask all of us the same about anything that we're afraid of in our life. Why are you afraid? It's a question that puts fear and faith in their proper place. It puts them out in the front so we can look at them. Jesus would have them remember Psalm 23. Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are with me. The great storm, the valley of the shadow of death, both of these things would generate fear. Fear is understandable. I don't encourage people to beat themselves up too much about being afraid. Fear is understandable, but fear is never a fruit of a lively faith. Faith doesn't lead us to fear, ever. Jesus is with us, so we don't need to be afraid. We aren't dragging him along reluctantly into our lives, and he's sort of just like a burden that we carry our Christian faith. You know, well, I guess I got to. We know as Christians that Jesus isn't a burden that we drag along. He's saying, I'm with you. Why are you afraid? It's a good question. Now, Apostle John talks about it like this. He says, perfect love, right? He's talking about Christ, Christ's love on the cross, his death, his resurrection, the salvation that we have in him, all of the love of God expressed in Jesus. He says, perfect love casts out fear. In Christ, you are safe. Fear looks at the storm. Faith looks at Christ. Fear sees things as out of control. Faith sees that everything is under control. It's just not under my control. Fear often will resist every kind of comfort or help and always has reasons why this or that won't work. You know, we've got to panic. But faith accepts God's comfort and help and resists asking why all the time. Faith never leads to fear. So Jesus asks, why are you afraid? And then he suggests the reason why they're afraid. Oh, you of little faith. I love how Jesus is in the Bible, in my life. Jesus isn't irritated with the disciples. Jesus isn't irritated with them. He won't be getting rid of any of them to replace them with better trained, more suitable men for his mission in the world. He's not agitated by our weakness and just hacked off that you don't get your act together. He just wants you to know him and trust him.

The safest place that they could possibly be on the entire planet at that moment was in that boat. And Jesus shows them this. He gets up and he rebukes the wind and the waves. And the Bible says there was a great calm. The Lord calms the sea. The scripture says a great calm. As great as the storm was, the calm is now as great as the storm. And he brings them to the other side. A great storm is followed by a great calm, Psalm 107 again. Then they cry to the Lord in their trouble. And he delivered them from their distress. And he made the storm be still. And the waves of the sea were hushed. And then they were glad that the waters were quiet. And he brought them to their desired haven.

Of course, an amazing thing had just happened. Any framework that they had just kind of embusted. Another account of this story says that these fishermen that were very afraid because the waves were so gigantic and they were sinking and heading to the bottom, that Jesus, after he stood up and he spoke and it all calmed down, the Bible says that they were essentially terrified. And you can picture that. It says that the disciples marveled. And the men marveled. Yes. If I went outside and I said, stop raining, and the sun came out and it stopped, one, you'd be very afraid of me. Two, you would marvel. What in the world? Or what sort of man is this that even winds and sea obey him?

In our lives, by the way, that question is exclusively negative. I ran through everything in my brain that I could remember when I said, what kind of man? And it's exclusively negative. It's like, what sort of man would treat his wife like that? What sort of man would do that to his kids? What sort of man would break this or that wall? What sort of man cuts off people in traffic like that, particularly me? What sort of man? And so on. But the disciples are not marveling at sin, once again, how bad it can be. But instead, they are marveling at a man who is different than anyone that they had ever known. What sort of man is this? Well, the first thing is he is, in fact, a man. They knew that. Some of them knew his parents. These folk, they knew him. They knew where he came from. They knew his people. And they saw that he was like any other man in so many ways. He got hungry. Obviously, he was tired from a long day's work because he was sleeping in the middle of the storm. It's funny reading sometimes how people try to deal with this story. And there's this idea out there that Jesus, he's so much not manly, I guess sort of godlike, that it all was a ruse. The sleeping was a ruse. Because who could sleep through a storm? And I'm like, people can sleep through a storm. If you're tired enough, you can sleep through anything. And Jesus is sleeping because he's exhausted from an entire day of labor, which he was doing through the night. And now he's asleep. He is, in fact, a man, and yet not like any other man. He was the sort of man, he was the sort of man who ruled over creation, like the Lord himself. I think about the plagues in Egypt

. You recall that story in the Old Testament where God brought a series of plagues against Pharaoh. And Pharaoh, he initially was just not that impressed. And the reason why he wasn't that impressed was because Pharaoh had magicians. And you'll recall that his sort of court magicians could do sort of variations on the same plagues. And so, but eventually, God displayed his power in such a way that the magicians sort of depart from the story. Because first, they're humble. They're given boils all over their bodies. And then the level of play becomes so grand that it's ridiculous to think that anyone could do this. I think about Jesus. Maybe there were other good teachers in Jesus's day. Not Jesus, but maybe people who they thought, like, wow, they teach pretty good. And even healers, even physicians, people who others went to and got some help for their disease, not as good as Jesus, but in the same sort of generalized category. There's other teachers. There's other medical people, physicians. And then Jesus calms the sea. And now there's no one in any category. There's no subset of people who can calm it a little less than Jesus. He's the only one in the category. What sort of man is this? Only the Lord of creation, only the one who made it all, can do that. What sort of man is this? And he was certainly the sort of man that would not be able to be manipulated or ruffled at all, have his feathers ruffled. He's, after all, more powerful than storms. He can sleep peacefully through them, and he can end them whenever he wants. He's greater even than the Old Testament greats, like Moses and Elijah and Elisha and David, who would call on the Lord to do some great thing. And the Lord would often come and do the thing which they were calling on him to do. But Jesus, he just stands up and does it. He doesn't ask the Father to calm the sea. Nope, just gets up and tells everything to stop. He was and is never tossed around like the waves of the sea, like James describes. He's never uncertain. He's never like doubting who he is and what he believes in. Jesus is a powerful and confident sort of man, a powerful and confident sort of man. Powerful and confident beyond any other man that they had ever met. What sort of man is this?

Oh, and he was also the sort of man that you would always want to be around. He was kind. He doesn't use his power, his power to be kind. His massive power to make his disciples cower in his presence or to belittle them or to mock them for not trusting him enough. He's kind. And he always encourages them towards trusting him, towards faith. He looks with compassion and kindness on the weakness of others. It's the sort of man you'd want to be around. He's not arrogant. He's not proud. He's humble. He's always humble. He was that sort of man. And of course, as the text describes, he's the saving sort of man because the boat doesn't go to the bottom of the sea. Jesus saves. Jesus saves the disciples.

What sort of man do you believe that he is? Is he mostly a teacher or gives you some wise words to help you live your life? Do you see him mostly as a healer, someone to pray to when you're sick to give the doctors who you actually trust a boost, a little divine kick? Do you see him as a storybook hero, a great man, and yet somehow who's a little bit disconnected from you in your life? What do you see him as the Lord, the ruler of all creation, the one who lived and died that you might not go to the bottom of the sea, but might receive forgiveness and eternal life instead, the one who's calling you today again to follow him? If he is the sort of man that Matthew is declaring that he is, then Psalm 107 paints for us the appropriate response. Because after the sailors are rescued in that Psalm, this is what it says. It says, let them thank the Lord for his steadfast love, for his wondrous works to the children of men. Let them extol him in the congregation of the people. Let them praise him in the assembly of the elders. May you thank the Lord for his steadfast love, for who he is, for his wondrous works. May your fears give way to faith in Jesus. And may you follow him every day, every moment, with your whole heart, mind, soul, and strength until he brings you through the storm to heaven's shores.

Let's pray. Oh, Lord, we're grateful. We're so grateful that we are never alone as Christians, but that in Christ we are safe. Please remind us of this in our troubles and whenever we are afraid. Give us hearts of thankfulness for your saving work in the world and in us. Help us. Help us to declare the good news of the gospel. This dark and dying world, help us to proclaim the name of Jesus every day of our lives and into all eternity. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.