Good morning. You can turn with me to Matthew chapter 12 this morning. If you're visiting with us, we are walking together through the Gospel of Matthew. It tells us the story of Jesus, who Jesus is, what kinds of things He did, and what it all means. It's a book that gives us a picture of what it means to follow Jesus, something which He called people then and now to do.

As this Gospel progresses, as you read through the book, you see that Matthew begins to emphasize that there's a growing conflict developing between Jesus and the religious leaders of His day, the Pharisees. Things begin to heat up, and we read about a couple of confrontations that occurred on and centered on the Sabbath day. The Bible says that after those confrontations, the Pharisees went out from the synagogue and they conspired against Him, and they did that to destroy Him. That's what their goal was, to destroy Jesus. Jesus, knowing their hearts and perceiving their plots, chooses a different path than just picking fights with them. At the same time, we see Him issuing strong and stern warnings. They're warnings that are true today as they were then. To be against Jesus is a very dangerous place to be.

Jesus declares that there's a larger battle even going on with the powers of darkness, with Satan himself, the strong man. And Jesus declares that He will win the battle. He must win the battle. The response as He's speaking about all of this to the religious leaders was that they demanded from Him more. They wanted a sign, something like Moses did. But we learned last week that Jesus promises only one sign, and that sign is the cross and the resurrection. He calls them again to repent of their sin and to seek Him for wisdom, even as He calls us to do the same thing.

So today's text comes after a very lengthy discourse where even prior to the conflict with the Pharisees, Jesus is sadly pronouncing woe against cities who saw Him do all the things He did and yet didn't believe. He proclaimed woe to the Pharisees for calling Him a servant of Beelzebub and for asking Him for a sign. In all of this, Jesus calls people to follow Him. He says, you must pick a side. And there are a few who do. They pick His side, His disciples. They're with Him in a house and they're listening to Him. And in today's text, Jesus is speaking to them and then He's interrupted.

So that's what we're going to read now, Matthew chapter 12 beginning at verse 46: "While He was still speaking to the people, behold, His mother and His brothers stood outside asking to speak to Him. But He replied to the man who told Him, 'Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?' And stretching out His hand toward His disciples, He said, 'Here are my mother and my brothers. For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.' This is the word of the Lord this morning."

Sometimes people will use the expression "inside scoop." They've got an inside scoop. They have inside information, an exclusive story. They are a part of a privileged few who are in the know. And sometimes we use that word "inside" like that to describe things like insider trading, the practice of illegally knowing or knowing some inside information and then illegally using that information to invest and make money. Or we talk about an inside joke, which nobody ever likes to be on the outside when there's an inside joke going on. But an inside joke is a joke that occurs among certain friends, known only to those on the inside. Or a bank robbery we might describe as an inside job. Someone was involved in the planning who was in the know, who knew what was going on with respect to bank operations.

Today in the story we encounter people who are inside the house where Jesus is teaching. They are receiving the inside scoop. They are people who are followers of Jesus, His disciples. And we encounter those who are outside the house. And what we find and what Jesus is talking about is that both are Jesus' family. So we should take a look at that this morning. While He was speaking to the people, behold, His mother and His brothers stood outside asking to speak to Him. His mom wanted to talk to Him. His brothers are out there and they wanted Jesus to come outside to ask Him something. We're not told what they wanted to talk about. We're just told that His mother and His brothers are outside and they want to talk to Him. And so they send a man inside to ask Jesus to come out and do what would be considered a very reasonable thing: to come out and talk to His mom and talk to His brothers.

Our families that we have in this world are important. Scripture teaches that everywhere. The fifth commandment is clear: honor your father and your mother. The apostle Paul reminds us of these things. He says that anyone who doesn't provide for his relatives and especially members of his own household is worse than an unbeliever. The call to teach your children is clear in the Bible. The family is the primary training ground for the young. And one of the responsibilities of parents is to bring up children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. So the fifth commandment is clear: honor your father and mother. The call to teach your children is clear in the Bible, to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. The call to love your wife or your husband is clear. The relationship between a man and his wife, that picture goes all the way back to the beginning of creation. It's meant for the mutual benefit of one another, for the multiplication of mankind. The relationship is to be a picture for the world to see of the relationship Christ has with His church. The importance of that relationship is captured in the fact that adultery, which breaks that bond, is one of the Ten Commandments as well, just like the fifth commandment.

At other times in the story we see Jesus honoring His mother at a wedding and on the cross. One of the last acts that Jesus does is making sure that His mother is taken care of. So we see Him doing this. And at other times we see Jesus confronting frivolous divorce and we see Him demonstrating how important little children are by calling them to come and their mothers to come so He can bless them. At other times we see Jesus doing these things. So families are important.

And yet there is a tension here in this passage. Jesus is unwilling to stop what He is doing to go talk to His mother and His brothers. He's unwilling to do that. He is not doing, by the way, what would be expected, and He seems once again to be asserting His authority over everyone and everything by just doing what He wants to do so that He can make a point. And He's going to be making a point, an important point, which is what He proceeds to do. Jesus stops and He replies to the man who's come in, the guy that His mom sent in to tell Jesus to come outside for a second, and He tells him, "Who are my mother and who are my brothers?" And then He just motions to all those who are inside listening to Him, not outside asking for Him to come out, but inside listening to Him, and He says, "Well, here they are. Here are my mother and sisters and brothers. These are the ones who are inside the house with me."

There is an expression that blood is thicker than water. That's generally understood to mean that family relationships trump all other relationships. Jesus should have gone out and talked to His mother. But Jesus is declaring that blood is not thicker than water. Jesus is declaring that His relationship with His people cannot be trumped by His brothers and His mother. Jesus makes this comment as He looks around at those who are inside the house, His disciples, even though He had an earthly family, they are not apparently His primary family. His disciples are. That should create tension for us.

One thing we can infer from this is that if you want to be a part of Jesus' primary family, you need to be inside the house. That's where Jesus is. And His attitude towards His disciples should be mirrored by His disciples. In other words, He must be the first love. Jesus says, "Here are my brothers and this is my mother, my mother's brothers, sisters." And so the responsibility of His disciples is to say, "Yep, and He's the same. He's my primary love." Our relationship with Christ must trump all other relationships. Your families are important, but your first love must be Christ. And your children are important, but your first love must be Christ. And your marriages are important. Your spouse is important, but your first love must be Christ.

When we get it backwards, when our families or our children or our spouse take precedence over our relationship with Christ, we put a burden of meaning and satisfaction in life on our families or our children or our spouse that they cannot bear. They become idols. Idols not only can't save us from our sins, they can't help us in our troubles, and they always disappoint. So the first thing to infer is just that if you want to be a part of Jesus' family, you've got to be like Him. You've got to be like, "Yep, I'm committed to Him. He's most important. He's the one that is my first love."

The second thing that He's saying in this relationship may be a little harder to accept. Jesus is saying that His relationship, this relationship with Him being central, okay, basically that what should His earthly family have done? They should have come inside versus the other way around. It would be more important for them to be listening to Him than for Him to be going out and listening to them. He's saying this, but it's the second part. And here it is. If we truly want to focus on the family, then our next focus after Christ Himself

 will be Christ's people, will be Jesus' disciples. The disciples will be the church. Now, I don't mean just becoming busy doing church things, and honestly, that was likely more of a problem for older generations. It's a rare person today who misses lots of earthly family events because there's one more thing they need to take care of over at the church. So in declaring that His disciples are His primary family, we can infer that other disciples, other Christians, and their needs are as important as, and sometimes in some circumstances may even be more important than, our earthly family's needs. As Jesus looked around and He saw His disciples, He declared that these disciples were at that moment far more important than His mother and brother who were outside. So Jesus remained inside, ministering to His family of disciples instead of speaking to His earthly family.

For us, then, to see other Christians in a right way, in a way that's consistent with the text, requires us to see the church in an entirely different way than maybe people talk about the church. It requires us to see the church not as a civic group or a volunteer organization or even something where a place where you go weekly and you attend together for a worship service. It requires seeing each other, working very hard at this, seeing each other as brothers and sisters in Christ, saved by God's grace as others who are actually sitting at the feet of Jesus. Each person who is a Christian is sitting at the feet of Jesus, and it's us saying, "That person is my brother. That person is my sister. That person is my mother. That person is my father." It means seeing other Christians as Jesus' family, a family of which you are a part in Christ. And seeing this, then, we ought to live accordingly.

It is true that the Bible contains some specific instructions for husbands and wives and for children. I was kind of considering it, not a ton for siblings, but a lot of instruction, very specific instruction for fathers and their children and for husbands and wives. But far more space is dedicated to the relationships that exist within the family of God. In fact, family language is even used. Here's 1 Timothy 5: "Don't rebuke an older man, but encourage him as you would a father. Younger men as brothers, older women as mothers, younger women as sisters in all purity." That's Paul talking to Timothy. He says, "This is how you should see everybody."

John, he's talking to the folks in his congregation. He says, "My children, my little children, I'm writing these things to you so that you won't sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate together with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous." And then he says this, 1 John 3: "By this we know love, that He laid down His life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers." And he's not talking about your earthly brothers, though certainly you should do that. But he's saying those who are sitting around the feet of Jesus, you should be really willing to lay down your life for your brother. And on top of that, there are so many passages, and you can certainly do a word search, it would be of great benefit, that speak of how we are to be with one another, that actually talk about the sibling relationship within the family of God. This is how we're supposed to be with one another. Sibling relationships in the family of Jesus, because we're all siblings in the church, they're emphasized in the Bible. And that's why it's impossible really to be like, to just be a Christian and not really be engaged and involved in the church with God's people. In other words, Christianity isn't just an intellectual faith choice, it is coming into a family. You're saying, "I am willing, I want to be a part, I want to be somebody who Jesus will look at and say, 'There is my brother.'" And I want to be in a group of people, that's what Jesus has said to all of them, "Here's my brother, here's my sister," and that's what we are with one another. You're not just making an intellectual choice when you come to Christ, you're joining a family. That's what Jesus is pointing out. Everybody thought He only had one family, and they were staying outside and He wasn't paying attention to them. And He says, "No, this is my family. Here's my brothers, here's my sisters."

The church is where the body of Christ is. It's the inside. It's the place where loving Christ happens, the place where the inside scoop displayed in prayer and word and sacrament, that's where it can all be found. It's the place where the family is expanded, it's the place where the family shows hospitality to one another, encourages each other, cares for one another, prays for one another. We're all a part of Christ's family.

Jesus makes an astounding statement. And He follows it up with another one that suggests how you and I can know if we are a part of His family. What do people do with the inside scoop? Well, they report on it. Anybody who said they had an inside scoop and then tells you what the inside scoop is, you might doubt whether they actually had an inside scoop. What about an inside joke? Well, they laugh at it. If you're not laughing, you're not on the inside. An inside joke is done like that. How do you know if you're a part of Jesus' family? Well, if you're on the inside, you live like someone who's on the inside. This is the point Jesus is going to make. If God is your Father, you live like it. And if Jesus is your Savior, you act like it. This is what He gets at in this statement here: "For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother."

What is the will of the Father according to Jesus? Well, He says this: "This is the will of my Father, that everyone who looks on the Son and believes in Him shall have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day." That's the will of the Father. That decree is overarching. The call. This is the will of the Father, that you place your faith in Christ. That you place your faith in Christ for salvation and forgiveness of sin first and foremost. That's what it means to come into the family of God. Have you done that? I mean one of the beautiful things about Christianity is Jesus doesn't just say, "I'm not going to talk to my parents or my mom and my brothers and they have to stay out there forever." I'm certain that they could have come inside. The invitation of Jesus is always that you can come inside. You need to repent of your sin, ask Him to forgive you, and then come inside. He invites you into His family. But it's His family. He's at the center. We're not.

What is the will of the Father according to Jesus? Jesus looks at children and He says, "This is the will of my Father, that not one of these little ones would perish." He calls us to become like children, to be humble. That's the Lord's will. And then He says that what you should do is you should love the Lord your God with all your heart, mind, soul, and strength. Love your neighbor as yourself. The Lord's will for you is that you would be like Christ in that: to love God and love your neighbor.

The Apostle Paul, in speaking to the churches in Colossae and Ephesus about the will of God, says these things. He says some of this: This is just from there. So God's will for you is that you would walk in a manner worthy of the Lord, fully pleasing to Him, bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the knowledge of God. So we bear fruit. God's will for us, He goes on, therefore as you receive Christ as Lord, walk in Him, rooted, build up in Him, established in the faith, just as you were taught, abounding in thanksgiving. God's will for us is that we would bear fruit, that we would love our neighbor, love God, that we would abound in thanksgiving. We would be so thankful to be a part of His family. He goes on to say, "I urge you to walk in a manner worthy of the calling to which you have been called. Here's a call to Christlikeness, with all humility and gentleness, patience, bearing with one another in love, eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit and the bond of peace. Walk in a manner worthy of the calling to which you have been called. You're here, you're sitting at the feet of Jesus. Be just like Him. He's calling you to be like Him in that." And then He goes on, He says, "Put away things like bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and slander along with all malice and be kind to one another, be tenderhearted, forgiving one another as God in Christ forgave you. Therefore, be imitators of God as beloved children. Walk in love as Christ loved us, gave Himself up for us, a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God."

This is the family you belong to. The one in the middle that was doing all of the teaching that calls you brother, that calls you sister, He's the one who would sacrifice His life for you. This is your family. Look carefully then how you walk, not as unwise but as wise. Make the best use of the time because the days are evil. Therefore, don't be foolish. Understand what the will of the Lord is. Don't get drunk with wine; that's debauchery. But be filled with the Spirit, addressing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord with all your heart, giving thanks always for everything to God the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, submitting to one another out of rever

ence for Christ and just much more. I mean the New Testament, Paul in his writings, and John, and Peter, they're writing what the will of God is for you. It's following Jesus that makes you a part of His family. It's submitting to Him, it's loving Him, it's listening to Him, it's being like Him so that Jesus says, "For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother."

I love my earthly family. They are a good family, both directions. No, you won't hear me complain much. They're a great family, but they're not ultimately my family. You're my family. Christ is my King. Christ is our King. We come, we sit at His feet. One day we will be together, worshiping the Lord together in glory, together as His family. We'll be joined by people that we don't know today, millions of people from all history, from every land, tribe, and tongue, and we'll all be sitting, standing, worshiping around the feet of Jesus. "Who are my mother and my brothers?" Jesus says, "These are. You are." What a great family to be a part of, to be a part of Jesus's family united to Christ by faith, adopted as sons and daughters. That's what Paul uses, that word. He says, "You've been adopted in." He says, "When the fullness of time came, God sent forth His Son, born of woman, born under the law, to redeem those who are under the law so that we might receive adoption as sons. And because you are sons, God has sent the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father. So you are no longer a slave but a son, and if a son, then you are an heir through God."

Because of Christ's work, inviting us inside by grace and by the cross, we sit at His feet. We are redeemed people. We are adopted as sons and daughters. We are children of God. Paul reminds us in that short passage of three important blessings that I want us to think about and close with today. First, your slavery to sin is over. You are no longer a slave. You have been rescued. The Bible says that all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God and that the wages of sin is death. But when Christ died on the cross, He took those wages in our place. He paid the penalty. He broke us from slavery to sin and He set us free to live for Him. And He helps us to do that by giving us another blessing. The second one is that God's Spirit, Paul reminds us, now dwells in us. He is always at work, bearing fruit in us, convicting us of sin, reminding us of the love of Christ, encouraging us to keep running the race that is set before us, bringing the scriptures to our minds and preserving us, keeping us for that third blessing. And that blessing, the third one, is that we are heirs. Christian, you are in Christ. If you're not a Christian, come inside. But if you're Christian, you are in Christ. And if you're in the inside, sitting at His feet, we are reminded that you are an heir through God of an inheritance, eternal life, resurrection of the body, an eternity of joy and peace. The end of all trouble, the end of all sorrow, the end of all grief, the end of all pain. That is the promise for those who are on the inside. Once you're in, may we stick close to Christ. May we enjoy His blessings. May we proclaim His excellencies. May we be willing to suffer, even die, in His name. And may we be a people who love the family, always love the family. Let's pray. Father in Heaven, we thank You that in Christ You have brought us from the outside into Your house and You've made us brothers and sisters. Help us by the power of the Holy Spirit to live accordingly, loving and encouraging and strengthening one another, showing hospitality and worshiping together with gratitude. And in it all, may You receive glory. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.